If you go to the country, far from city lights, you can see about 3,000 stars on a clear
night. If your eyes were bigger, you could see many more stars. With a pair of binoculars, an optical device that effectively enlarges the pupil of your eye by about 30
times, the number of stars you can see increases to the tens of thousands. With a
medium-sized telescope with a light-collecting mirror 30 centimeters in diameter,
you can see hundreds of thousands of stars. With a large observatory telescope,
millions of stars become visible.
It would seem that when it comes to observing
the universe, the larger the instrument, the better. This is true up to a point, but there are limits—limits not imposed by technology but by
nature itself.
Surrounding Earth is a life-sustaining atmosphere that stands between our eyes and the radiation that falls upon Earth from outer space.
This radiation is comprised of a very broad spectrum of energies and wavelengths. Collectively,
they are referred to as the electromagnetic spectrum. They range from radio and microwave
radiation on the low energy (long wavelength)
end through infrared, visible, ultraviolet, and xrays to gamma rays on the high energy (short

wavelength) end. Gases and other components
of our atmosphere distort, filter, and block most
of this radiation permitting only a partial picture, primarily visible radiation and some radio
waves, to reach Earth’s surface. Although many
things can be learned about our universe by
studying it from the surface of Earth, the story is
incomplete. To view celestial objects over the
whole range of the electromagnetic spectrum, it
is essential to climb above the atmosphere into
outer space.
From its earliest days, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) has used the
emerging technology of rockets to explore the
universe. By lofting telescopes and other scientifSpace-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

1

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 2

ic instruments above the veil of Earth’s atmosphere, NASA has delivered a treasure house of
information to astronomers, leading them to

2

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

rethink their most fundamental ideas about what
the universe is, how it came to be, how it functions, and what it is likely to become.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 3

HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE
This curriculum guide uses hands-on activities to help students and teachers understand
the significance of space-based astronomy—astronomical observations made from
outer space. It is not intended to serve as a curriculum. Instead, teachers should select
activities from this guide that support and extend existing study. The guide contains few
of the traditional activities found in many astronomy guides such as constellation studies, lunar phases, and planetary orbits. It tells, rather, the story of why it is important to
observe celestial objects from outer space and how to study the entire electromagnetic
spectrum. Teachers are encouraged to adapt these activities for the particular needs of
their students. When selected activities from this guide are used in conjunction with traditional astronomy curricula, students benefit from a more complete experience.
The guide begins with a survey of astronomyrelated spacecraft NASA has sent into outer
space. This is followed by a collection of activities
organized into four units: The Atmospheric
Filter, The Electromagnetic Spectrum, Collecting
Electromagnetic Radiation, and Down to Earth.
A curriculum matrix identifies the curriculum
areas each activity addresses. Following the
activities is information for obtaining a 35 mm
slide set with descriptions showing current

results from NASA spacecraft such as the
Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Compton
Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO), and the
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE). The
guide concludes with a glossary, a reference list,
a NASA Resources list, and an evaluation card.
Feedback from users of this guide is essential for
the development of future editions and other
classroom supplementary materials.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

3

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 5

THE SPACE AGE BEGINS
Within months of each other, the United States and the Soviet Union launched
their first artificial satellites into orbit around Earth. Both satellites were small and
simple. Sputnik 1, a Soviet spacecraft, was the first to reach orbit. It was a
58-centimeter-diameter aluminum sphere that carried two radio transmitters,
powered by chemical batteries. The satellite reached orbit on October 4, 1957.
Although an extremely primitive satellite by today’s standards, Sputnik 1 nevertheless enabled scientists to learn about Earth’s magnetic field, temperatures in
space, and the limits of Earth’s atmosphere.
A much larger Sputnik 2 followed, carrying a
small dog as a passenger. Although primarily
investigating the response of living things to prolonged periods of microgravity, Sputnik 2 did
sense the presence of a belt of high-energy
charged particles trapped by Earth’s magnetic
field. Explorer 1, the United States’ first satellite,
defined that field further.
The cylindrical, 13.6 kilogram Explorer 1 rode
to space on top of a Juno I rocket on January 31,
1958. It was launched by the United States Army
in association with the National Academy of
Sciences and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory of

the California Institute of Technology. NASA
was not created formally by an act of Congress
until the following October.
Explorer 1 carried scientific instruments
designed by Dr. James Van Allen of the
University of Iowa. Circling Earth in an orbit
ranging from 360 to 2,531 kilometers, the
satellite radioed back radiation measurements,
revealing a deep zone of radiation surrounding
Earth.
Born of the technology of World War II and the
tensions of the Cold War, the space age began in
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

5

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 6

Artist’s concept of Explorer 1 in space

the peaceful pursuit of scientific discovery. In the
more than 35 years that have followed, thousands of spacecraft have been launched into
Earth orbit, to the Moon, and to the planets. For

6

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

the majority of those spacecraft, the goal has
been to learn about Earth, our solar system, and
the universe.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 7

ASTROPHYSICS
Just a few decades ago, the word astronomy was a general term that described
the science of the planets, moons, Sun and stars, and all other heavenly bodies. In
other words, astronomy meant the study of anything beyond Earth. Although still
an applicable term, modern astronomy, like most other sciences, has been divided
and subdivided into many specialties. Disciplines that study the planets include
planetary geology and planetary atmospheres. The study of the particles and fields
in space is divided into magnetospheric physics, ionospheric physics, and cosmic
and heliospheric physics. The Sun has its own solar physics discipline. The origin
and evolution of the universe is the subject of cosmology.
Generally, objects beyond our solar system are
handled in the field of astrophysics. These
include stars, the interstellar medium, other
objects in our Milky Way Galaxy, and galaxies
beyond our own.
NASA defines astrophysics as the investigation
of astronomical bodies by remote sensing from
Earth or its vicinity. Because the targets of the
astrophysicist are generally beyond human
reach even with our fastest rockets, astrophysicists concentrate solely on what the electro-

magnetic spectrum can tell them about the
universe. NASA’s astrophysics program has
three goals: to understand the origin and fate
of the universe; to describe the fundamental
laws of physics; and to discover the nature and
evolution of galaxies, stars, and the solar system. The investigations of astrophysicists are
carried out by instruments aboard free-flying
satellites, sounding rockets that penetrate into
space for brief periods, high-flying aircraft and
high-altitude balloons, and Space Shuttle missions.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

7

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 9

A BRIEF HISTORY OF
THE UNITED STATES
ASTRONOMY SPACECRAFT
AND CREWED SPACE FLIGHTS
The early successes of Sputnik and the Explorer series spurred the
United States to develop long-range programs for exploring space. Once
the United States became comfortable with the technical demands of
spacecraft launches, NASA quickly began scientific studies in space
using both crewed and non-crewed spacecraft launches.
Teams of scientists began their studies in space
close to home by exploring the Moon and the
solar system. Encouraged by those successes,
they have looked farther out to nearly the beginning of the universe.
Observing the heavens from a vantage point
above Earth is not a new idea. The idea of placing telescopes in orbit came quite early—at least
by 1923 when Hermann Oberth described the
idea. Even before his time, there were a few
attempts at space astronomy. In 1874, Jules
Janseen launched a balloon from Paris with two
aeronauts aboard to study the effects of the
atmosphere on sunlight. Astronomers continue
to use balloons from launch sites in the
Antarctic; Palestine, Texas; and Alice Springs,

Australia. After launch, scientists
chase the balloon in a plane as the
balloon follows the prevailing winds,
traveling thousands of kilometers
before sinking back to Earth. A typical balloon launch yields many
hours of astronomical observations.
Rocket research in the second half of
the 20th century developed the technology for launching satellites.
Between 1946 and 1951, the U.S.
launched 69 V-2 rockets. The V-2
rockets were captured from the
Germans after World War II and
used for high altitude research.
Several of those flights studied ultra-

U.S. V-2 rocket launch

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

9

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 10

violet and x-ray emissions from the Sun. Today,
sounding rockets are used primarily by universities. They are inexpensive and quick, but provide
only a few minutes of observations.
To conduct its current research, NASA uses big
rockets like Atlas, Delta, Titan, and the Space
Shuttle as well as small rockets launched from a B52 aircraft to lift satellites into orbit. Except for the
largest rockets, which are launched in Florida and
California, rocket research and launches occur at
many places around the United States. NASA also
uses the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) that
carries a 0.9-meter telescope inside a C-141 aircraft. It flies above the densest part of the atmosphere and observes in the far-infrared and submillimeter wavelengths. KAO flies approximately 80
times a year. KAO can reach an altitude of 13,700
meters with a normal flight time of 7.5 hours.

10

NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory

accommodate a 2.5 meter reflecting telescope,
which is slightly larger than the Hubble Space
Telescope (HST) at 2.4 meters. Like KAO,
SOFIA will conduct infrared astronomy and fly at
an altitude of 13,000 meters for 8 hours.

In the near future, NASA will begin flying the
Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy
(SOFIA). SOFIA is a 747 aircraft modified to

Over the years, NASA space probes have sent
back detailed images of the planets Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune. Mariner 2 was the first spacecraft to
explore another planet when it flew past Venus
in 1962. The missions to the planets have redefined the picture of our solar system. Scientists
have an incredible set of data from almost every
planet in the solar system.

Black Brandt sounding rocket ready for launch to study
Supernova 1987A

Final inflation of an instrument-carrying helium balloon before
launch from Palestine, TX

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 11

of our nearest star. In the 1970’s, Skylab astronauts brought back from orbit a wealth of data
on the Sun, using x-rays to study its activity.
In 1978, one of the most successful astronomical satellite missions, the International
Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), was launched.
This satellite has an ultraviolet telescope that
has been used to study the universe in the
ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Many scientists continue to use
IUE simultaneously with other satellites and
Earth telescopes to gather multi-wavelength
data on astronomical objects.

Skylab 4 picture of the Sun in ionized helium light

We learned that Venus is hotter than Mercury.
Data from satellites in orbit around Venus have
told us about the atmosphere and terrain of the
planet. By monitoring Venus’ atmosphere, scientists can study the effects of a runaway greenhouse effect. Several Russian spacecraft have
explored the surface of Venus as well as the
Moon and Mars.
Although spacecraft have mapped the surface of
Mars, the Mars Viking mission gently deposited two landers on the surface that sent back
data. They still sit on the surface there. The two
interplanetary travelers, Voyager 1 and 2
(launched in September and August 1977,
respectively) visited Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune and are now leaving the solar system on their way into interstellar space. They
sent back new data on these gas giant planets.
Their discoveries included volcanoes on Io (a
satellite of Jupiter), storms on Neptune, and
ring shepherd satellites around Saturn. The two
Voyager missions represent an incredible success story. They provided unique glimpses of
the planets and redefined the history of our
solar system.
Beginning in 1962, NASA launched a series of
nine orbiting observatories to observe the Sun.
Astrophysicists began to understand the interior

Other NASA satellites have carried x-ray
detectors into space. One of the first (1970)—
called Uhuru (Swahili for freedom)—mapped
the entire sky in x-ray wavelengths. Later
(1978), the second High Energy Astrophysics
Observatory (HEAO-2), called Einstein,
imaged many objects in x-ray light. Today a
satellite called ROSAT (a name honoring the
physicist who discovered x-rays, Dr. Wilhelm
Roentgen) continues the study of individual
sources of x-rays in the sky. All of these satellites added new objects to the astronomical
zoo and helped scientists understand the
processes that make x-rays in space. The sheer
number of high-energy objects discovered by
these satellites surprised and excited the scientific community.
The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS)
was launched in 1983. It mapped the sky in
infrared wavelengths. IRAS scientists have discovered thousands of infrared sources never
seen before. The infrared part of the spectrum
tells about molecules in space and gas and dust
clouds where new stars are hidden until they
are bright enough to outshine their birth
cloud.
The Space Shuttle is used to introduce instruments into low Earth orbit. Satellites like the
HST orbit about 600 kilometers above Earth’s
surface. This is a low Earth orbit and accessible
to the Shuttle. To put satellites into high Earth
orbit, an upper stage must be carried in the
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

11

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 12

Top: Thermal background radiation measured by the COBE
spacecraft

The Hubble Space Telescope attached to the Space Shuttle
Endeavour during the 1993 service mission

Bottom: Image of the Milky Way taken by the COBE spacecraft

astronomer of the 17th century) took pictures of
several asteroids. The Galileo spacecraft was
designed to study Jupiter’s atmosphere, satellites,
and surrounding magnetosphere. The spacecraft
is currently orbiting Jupiter and performing an
extended study of the planet’s moons.

Shuttle’s payload bay or the satellite is lofted
with one of several different kinds of noncrewed launch vehicles. For example, the
Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite (GOES) orbits about 40,000 kilometers above Earth’s surface. A Delta rocket was
used to put GOES into high orbit. The choice
of altitude—high Earth orbit or low Earth
orbit—depends on the data to be measured.

Recent and Multi-Mission Programs
Magellan
In May 1989, the Magellan spacecraft was
released from the Space Shuttle and sent on its
way to orbit Venus. The atmosphere of Venus is
unfriendly to humans with its thick sulfuric acid
clouds, high pressures, and high temperatures.
Magellan used radar to penetrate Venus’s dense
atmosphere and map the planet’s surface.
Galileo
In October of that same year, another Shuttle
mission launched Galileo on its way to visit the
planet Jupiter. On its way out to Jupiter, Galileo
(named after Galileo Galilei, an Italian

12

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE)
Just a month later, in November 1989, the
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) was
launched from a Delta rocket. This satellite surveyed the entire sky in microwave wavelengths
and provided the first precise measurement of
variations in the background radiation of the universe. The distribution of this radiation does not
follow the predictions of the Big Bang Theory.
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST)
In April 1990, the crew of the Space Shuttle
Discovery launched the HST. This telescope
combines ultraviolet and optical imaging with
spectroscopy to provide high quality data of a
variety of astronomical objects. Although the
primary mirror aboard the satellite was later discovered to be slightly flawed, astronomers were
able to partially compensate for the slightly outof-focus images through computer processing. In
December 1993, the Hubble servicing mission

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 13

Gamma ray bursts detected by the Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory

•

Gamma ray loud blazars (quasars with particle
jets aimed at us) to be a new class of objects;
and

•

The galactic center glows in antimatter radiation.

Deployment of the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory from
the Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1991

permitted astronauts to add compensating
devices to the flawed mirror, to readjust its focus,
and to replace or repair other instruments and
solar arrays. The servicing mission has led to
images of unprecedented light sensitivity and
clarity.
Astro-1 and the Broad-Band X-ray Telescope
(BBXRT)
In December 1990, the crew of the Space Shuttle
Columbia conducted two experiments during its
flight. The Astro-1 instrument platform and the
Broad-Band X-ray Telescope (BBXRT) both
study the x-ray and ultraviolet emissions of
astronomical objects.
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO)
A few months later, in April 1991, the Compton
Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO) was
launched from the Space Shuttle. CGRO is the
second of NASA’s Great Observatories. During
its lifetime, CGRO made some of the most
important discoveries in the field of gamma-ray
astronomy:
•

Gamma ray bursts (short-lived, but extremely powerful explosions) are evenly distributed
across the sky, and thus outside the Milky
Way galaxy;

CGRO was safely and flawlessly de-orbited over
the Pacific Ocean on June 4, 2000.
Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE)
In May 1992, a Delta rocket boosted the
Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) into orbit.
This satellite, which concluded its mission in
December 2000, studied the far ultraviolet part
of the spectrum. One unexpected result from
this mission was the distances at which ultraviolet sources were seen. The scientists expected to
see ultraviolet radiation only from within 50
light years of the Sun. EUVE detected extreme
ultraviolet emissions from distant galaxies in its
first year of operation.
Cassini-Huygens
Launched in October 1997, the Cassini-Huygens
mission will do a detailed study of Saturn, its
rings, its magnetosphere, its icy satellites, and its
moon Titan. The Cassini Orbiter’s mission consists of delivering the Huygens probe (provided
by the European Space Agency) to Titan to study
its clouds, atmosphere, and surface, and then
remaining in orbit around Saturn for detailed
studies of the planet and its rings and satellites.
Cassini will arrive at Saturn on July 1, 2004.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

13

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 14

Chandra X-ray Observatory
Launched in July of 1999, Chandra is the third
of NASA’s Great Observatories, after the HST
and CGRO. It is performing an exploration of
the hot turbulent regions in space and has 8times greater resolution than previous x-ray telescopes enabling it to detect sources more than
20-times fainter than previous observations.
Chandra’s improved sensitivity will make possible more detailed studies of black holes, supernovas, and dark matter and increase our understanding of the origin, evolution, and destiny of
the universe.
The Discovery Program
Discovery represents the implementation of
“Faster, Better, Cheaper” planetary missions. The
philosophy of Discovery is to solicit proposals
for an entire mission, put together by consortia
comprised of industry, small businesses, and universities. The goal is to launch many, smaller
missions that do focused science with fast turnaround times and for which the entire mission
cost (design, development, launch vehicle,
instruments, spacecraft, launch, mission operations, and data analysis) is minimal. Discovery
missions selected to date include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR)
Mars Pathfinder
Lunar Prospector
Stardust
Genesis
Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR)
ASPERA-3
Deep Impact
Mercury Surface Space Environment
Geochemistry and Ranging mission (MESSENGER)

The Explorer Program
The Explorer Program began with the launch of
Explorer 1 in 1958, and became a sustained program beginning in 1961. Over 70 “Explorer”
missions have been launched successfully, pioneering space research on micrometeoroids, the
Earth’s magnetosphere, x-ray astrophysics, the
cosmic microwave background and many other
fields of space science investigation. In addition,

14

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

the Explorer program has a long history of providing scientific instruments as part of other
nations’ missions. Current Explorer missions
include:
• Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite
(SWAS)
• Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE)
• Transition Region and Coronal Explorer
(TRACE)
• Fast Auroral Snapshot Explorer (FAST)
• Solar Anomalous and Magnetospheric Particle
Explorer (SAMPEX)
• Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE)
• Imager for Magnetopause-to-Aurora Global
Exploration (IMAGE)
• High Energy Transient Explorer-2 (HETE-2)
• High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager
(HESSI)
• Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP)
• Cooperative Astrophysics and Technology
Satellite (CATSAT)
• Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX)
• Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer
(CHIPS)
• Inner Magnetosphere Explorer (IMEX)
• Two Wide-Angle Imaging Neutral-Atom
Spectrometer (TWINS)
• Swift
• Full-Sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer
(FAME)
• Coupled Ion-Neutral Dynamics Investigations
(CINDI)
The Mars Surveyor Program
The Mars Surveyor program reflects a long-term
commitment to the exploration of the Red
Planet. NASA intends to launch one or two
spacecraft to Mars whenever Mars’ orbit allows,
approximately every 26 months. The first spacecraft in this series was the Mars Global Surveyor
in 1996. The Mars ‘98 Orbiter and Lander were
launched in December 1998 and January 1999
but were lost during their journey to Mars. The
2001 Mars Odyssey orbiter is scheduled to arrive
at Mars in late 2001 and is expected to produce
exceptional science mapping the mineralogy of
the Martian surface. Currently under development are twin scientific exploration rovers scheduled for launch in 2003. Each of the rovers will

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 15

Astronomy Space Missions
(partial list)

Year

Mission

Target

Year

Mission

Target

1957
1961
1962
1962
1963
1965
1967
1968
1968
1969
1969
1970
1971
1971
1972
1972
1973
1973
1973
1974
1975
1975
1976
1977
1977
1978
1978
1978

Stratoscope I
Explorer 11
Arobee
Mariner 2
Mars 1
Mariner 4
OSO-3
RAE-1
OAO-2
Vela 5A
Apollo 11
SAS-1
Explorer 43
Mariner 9
Pioneer 10
Copernicus
Pioneer 11
Skylab
Explorer 49
Mariner 10
SAS-3
Viking 1 & 2
Viking 1 & 2
Voyager 2
Voyager 1
IUE
Pioneer Venus-A
HEAO-2

Sun
gamma rays
X-ray sources
Venus
Mars
Mars
gamma rays
radio
UV sky
gamma rays
Moon
X-ray sky
solar wind/ radio
Mars
deep space
UV sky
deep space
Sun
radio sources
Mercury
X-ray sources
Mars
Mars
outer planets
outer planets
UV sky
radar studies
X-ray sky

1983
1985
1989
1989

IRAS
Spacelab-2
Magellan
Galileo

1989
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1991
1992
1994
1994
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1996
1996
1997
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999

COBE
HST
ROSAT
Ulysses
ASTRO-1
ROSAT
Yohko
Extreme UV Explorer
Wind
Clemintine
Infrared Telescope in Space
Infrared Space Observatory
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Solar Heliospheric Observatory
ASTRO-2
Mars Global Surveyor
Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous
Mars Pathfinder
Cassini
Lunar Prospector
Stardust
Mars Climate Orbiter
Mars Polar Orbiter
Chandra X-ray Observatory

infrared sky
infrared sky
Venus
Jupiter/asteroids/
Earth/Venus
microwave sky
UV sky
X-ray sky
Sun
X-ray and UV sky
X-ray sky
Sun in X-rays
X-ray sky
Solar wind
Moon
IR sky
IR sky
X-ray sky
Sun
UV sky
Mars
Asteroid
Mars
Saturn
Moon
Comet
Mars
Mars
X-ray sky

be delivered to the surface protected by inflated
airbags similar to the successful Mars Pathfinder.
Each rover will be equipped with an integrated
suite of instruments (cameras, spectrometers,
microscopes, and abrasion tool) that will allow it
to behave as a robotic field geologist. They will
have an exploration range of up to 1 kilometer
during their 90 days of operational life on the
surface of Mars. In 2005, NASA plans to launch
a powerful scientific orbiter. This mission, the
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, will focus on analyzing the surface at new spatial scales and in
new spectral regions in an effort to follow the
potential evidence of water from the Mars
Global Surveyor images and to bridge the gap
between surface observations and measurements
from orbit. The next step in the Mars exploration program strategy will be to send a longrange, long-duration mobile science laboratory
to Mars (at least by 2009, and as early as 2007).
This “smart lander” will be a major leap in surface measurements and pave the way for a future
sample return mission.

New Millennium Program
NASA has an ambitious plan for space exploration in the next century. It envisions a scenario
in which spacecraft will have revolutionary new
capabilities compared to those of today.
Spacecraft are envisioned as flying in formation,
or in fleets, or having artificial intelligence to
provide the kind of capability that can answer
the more detailed level of questions that scientists have about the universe. Missions include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Deep Space 1
Deep Space 2
Starlight
Earth Observing 1
Earth Observing 3
Space Technology 5
Space Technology 6

The goal of the New Millennium Program (NMP)
is to identify and test advanced technologies that
will provide spacecraft with the capabilities they
need in order to achieve NASA’s vision.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

15

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 16

Technologies such as solar electric propulsion and
artificial intelligence promise a great leap forward
in terms of future spacecraft capability, but they
also present a risk to missions that use them for the
first time. Through a series of deep space and Earth
orbiting flights, NMP will demonstrate these
promising but risky technologies in space to prove
that they work. Once validated, the technologies
pose less of a risk to missions that would like to use
them to achieve their scientific objectives.
International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP)
Program
Collaborative efforts by NASA, the European
Space Agency (ESA), and the Institute of Space
and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan led to
the International Solar-Terrestrial Physics program, consisting of a set of missions being carried
out during the 1990’s and into the next century.
This program combines resources and scientific
communities on an international scale using a
complement of several missions, along with complementary ground facilities and theoretical
efforts, to obtain coordinated, simultaneous investigations of the Sun-Earth space environment over
an extended period of time. Missions include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Wind
Polar
Geotail
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory
(SOHO)
Ulysses
Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE)
IMP-8
EQUATOR-8

Living With A Star (LWS)
Living With A Star (LWS) is a NASA initiative
that will develop the scientific understanding
necessary to effectively address those aspects of

16

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

the coupled Sun-Earth system that directly affect
life and society on Earth. LWS missions include:
•
•
•
•

Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO)
Sentinels
Radiation Belt Mappers (RBM)
Ionospheric Mappers (IM)

Scientific Balloon Program
Balloons offer a low-cost, quick response method
for doing scientific investigations. Balloons are
mobile, meaning they can be launched where the
scientist needs to conduct the experiment, and can
be readied for flight in as little as six months.
Balloon payloads provide us with information on
the atmosphere, the universe, the Sun, and the
near-Earth and space environment. NASA launches about 30 scientific balloons each year.
Sounding Rocket Program
Experiments launched on sounding rockets provide a variety of information, including chemical
makeup and physical processes taking place in the
atmosphere; the natural radiation surrounding the
Earth; and data on the Sun, stars, and galaxies.
Sounding rockets provide the only means of making in-situ measurements at altitudes between the
maximum altitudes for balloons (about 30 miles
or 48 kilometers) and the minimum altitude for
satellites (100 miles or 161 kilometers).
Using space-borne instruments, scientists now
map the universe in many wavelengths.
Satellites and telescopes provide data in radio,
microwave, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, x-ray,
and gamma ray. By comparing data from an
object in the sky, in all wavelengths,
astronomers are learning more about the history
of our universe. Visit http://spacescience.nasa.gov,
for more information about NASA Space
Science missions and programs.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 17

UNIT 1
THE ATMOSPHERIC FILTER
Introduction
Earth’s atmosphere is essential to life. This ocean of fluids and suspended particles
surrounds Earth and protects it from the hazards of outer space. It insulates the
inhabitants of Earth from the extreme temperatures of space and stops all but the
larger meteoroids from reaching the surface. Furthermore, it filters out most radiation dangerous to life. Without the atmosphere, life would not be possible on Earth.
The atmosphere contains the oxygen we breathe. It also has enough pressure so
that water remains liquid at moderate temperatures.
Yet the same atmosphere that makes life possible
hinders our understanding of Earth’s place in the
universe. Our only means for investigating distant stars, nebulae, and galaxies is to collect and
analyze the electromagnetic radiation these
objects emit into space. However, most of this
radiation is absorbed or distorted by the atmosphere before it can reach a ground-based telescope. Only visible light and some radio waves,
infrared, and ultraviolet light survive the passage

from space to the ground. That limited amount
of radiation has provided astronomers enough
information to estimate the general shape and
size of the universe and categorize its basic components, but there is much left to learn. It is
essential to study the entire spectrum rather than
just limited regions of it. Relying only on the
radiation that reaches Earth’s surface is like listening to a piano recital on a piano that has just
a few of its keys working.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

17

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 18

Unit Goal
•

•

Demonstration 1
Small sheet of clear glass or Plexiglass™
Emery paper (fine) to smooth sharp edges
of glass or plastic

•

Demonstration 2
Shallow dish or pie tin
Empty coffee can
Ice
Spray bottle and water
Cloud cutout (cardboard or other material)

•

Demonstration 3
Stick matches
Eye protection

•

Demonstration 4
Food warmer fuel (e.g. Sterno™) or electric hotplate
Matches if using fuel
Eye protection if using fuel
Aluminum foil
Sewing pin

•

Demonstration 5
150 to 200 watt light bulb
Uncovered light fixture
Star slide (see demonstration 4)

To demonstrate how the components of
Earth’s atmosphere absorb or distort incoming electromagnetic radiation.

Teaching Strategy
The following demonstrations are designed to
show how components of Earth’s atmosphere filter
or distort electromagnetic radiation. Since we cannot produce all of the different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation in a classroom, the light from
a slide or overhead projector in a darkened room
will represent the complete electromagnetic spectrum. A projection screen will represent Earth’s surface and objects placed between the projector and
the screen will represent various components of
Earth’s atmosphere. All of the demonstrations can
be conducted in a single class period. Place the projector in the back of the classroom and aim it
towards the screen at the front. Try to get the room
as dark as possible before doing the demonstrations.

ACTIVITY: Clear Air
Description:
Students observe some of the problems inherent
in using astronomical telescopes on Earth’s surface through a series of brief demonstrations
given by the teacher.
Objectives:
To demonstrate how Earth’s atmosphere interferes
with the passage of electromagnetic radiation.
National Education Standards:
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Transfer of energy
Technology
Understand troubleshooting, R & D,
invention, innovation, & experimentation
Materials and Tools:
For all demonstrations
Darkened room
Overhead or slide projector
Worksheet for each student

18

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Background:
Earth’s atmosphere appears to be clear to the naked
eye. On a dark, cloud-free night far from city lights,
thousands of stars are visible. It is hard to imagine a
better view of the sky when the wisps of the Milky
Way Galaxy are visible stretching from the northern to the southern sky. In spite of the apparent
clarity, the view is flawed. Many wavelengths are
blocked by the atmosphere and visible light is filtered and distorted.
The demonstrations that follow are designed to
show how Earth’s atmosphere interferes with the
passage of electromagnetic radiation. Visible light
is used as an example of all wavelengths since most
other wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation are
difficult and even dangerous to produce in the
classroom. Make sure students understand that
the demonstrations are examples of what happens
across the entire electromagnetic spectrum.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 19

Management and Tips:
To make effective use of the demonstrations, it
is necessary to have a room that can be darkened. A projection screen will represent Earth’s
surface and the light cast by an overhead or
slide projector will represent all the wavelengths
of electromagnetic radiation coming to Earth
from space. The demonstrations are things that
you do between the screen and the projector to
represent phenomena occurring in Earth’s
atmosphere.
The actual demonstrations will take approximately 15 minutes to complete. Allow time to
discuss the significance of each demonstration
with your students. The most important thing to
know is that Earth’s atmosphere only allows a
small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum to
reach Earth’s surface and astronomers’ telescopes.
The information astronomers can collect is
incomplete and thus the story of the universe
they are able to construct from this information
is also incomplete. Conclude the discussion with
the question “What can astronomers do about
it?” The answer is to move observatories off the
surface of Earth into outer space.
Procedures:
Demonstration 1 – The Air Is Not Clear
In this demonstration you will hold up a sheet
of “clear” glass between the projector and
screen. The glass represents the gases in Earth’s
atmosphere. Light from the projector is interrupted by the glass in its passage to the screen.
Notice the faint shadow the “clear” glass casts
on the screen. The shadow is evidence of a small
amount of absorption of light by the glass. Also
look for a reflection from the glass back in the
direction of space. Photographs of Earth from
space show a thin bluish layer of gas surrounding Earth. Being able to see the atmosphere
from space indicates that some of the electromagnetic radiation falling on it from space is
reflected back out into space.

outer surface of the can will begin “sweating.” This
is evidence that the air in the classroom holds
moisture that condenses out when it comes in contact with a cold surface.
In the second part of the demonstration, spray
a fine mist of water in the air between the projector and the screen. This illustrates how fine
water droplets suspended in the air will block
electromagnetic radiation. High humidity
casts a haze in the sky that blocks incoming
visible light.

Demonstration 2 – Water in the Air
To begin this demonstration, fill a coffee can with
ice cubes. The can is set in the middle of a dish or
pie tin and left undisturbed. In a few minutes, the
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

19

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 20

Food warmer fuel
or electric hotplate

Finally, hold up the cloud cutout. The cloud shows
what happens when moisture condenses in the air
around small dust particles. The shadow cast by
the cloud shows how clouds can substantially
block visible light coming to Earth from space.
Demonstration 3 – Pollution
While wearing eye protection, strike a match and
then blow it out right away. The smoke particles
released from the match head will produce a
noticeable shadow on the screen. Pollution from
a variety of sources (human-made and natural)
block some of the incoming visible light.

slide frame and use a pin to randomly prick
about 30 holes into the foil. If you are using an
overhead projector, prepare a star slide from a
large square of aluminum foil. The square should
cover the entire stage of the projector. Poke
about 100 holes through the foil.
Project light through the slide you prepared. A
small star field will be displayed on the screen.
While wearing eye protection (not necessary if
using an electric hot plate), place the warmer
very near and just below the beam of the projector. Stars will show a twinkling effect on the
screen. This demonstration shows how heat currents in Earth’s atmosphere can distort the
images of astronomical objects.
Demonstration 5 – Day/Night
Use the star slide you prepared in the previous
activity. Hold up the lamp with the light bulb

Demonstration 4 – Heat Currents
Prior to the demonstration, create a star slide. If
you are using a slide projector, obtain a plastic
slide mount in which the film can be removed.
Slip a small square of aluminum foil into the

20

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 21

near the screen. Turn on the bulb. Many of the
stars on the screen near the bulb will disappear.
This demonstration shows how the Sun’s light
overpowers the fainter stars. Sunlight brightens
the gases, water, and particles in Earth’s atmosphere so that the distant stars are not visible. If
the Sun’s light could be dimmed, other stars
would be visible at the same time.

based observatories. Students may be aware of
new strategies for improving the observations of
Earth-based telescopes such as adaptive mirrors
that change their shape slightly many times each
second to compensate for air currents. However,
no advanced telescope design technique will
make up for electromagnetic radiation that does
not reach Earth’s surface.

Assessment:
Collect student sheets. Compare the answers the
students have given but focus on the last question in which students must propose solutions to
the atmospheric problems associated with Earth-

Extensions:
• Have students research new Earth-based telescope designs on the Internet. Use search
terms such as observatory, telescopes, and
astronomy.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

21

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 22

Student Work Sheet

Clear Air
Name:
1. Earth’s atmosphere creates problems for astronomers. Identify and explain 3
ways Earth’s atmosphere interferes with astronomical observations.
A.

B.

C.
2. How might these problems affect the discoveries and conclusions astronomers
reach through their observations?

3. Why are most astronomical observatories built on remote mountains?

4. What can astronomers do to capture the missing electromagnetic radiation for
study?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 23

UNIT 2
THE ELECTROMAGNETIC
SPECTRUM
Introduction
Contrary to popular belief, outer space is not empty space. It is filled with electromagnetic radiation that crisscrosses the universe. This radiation comprises the
spectrum of energy ranging from radio waves on one end to gamma rays on the
other. It is called the electromagnetic spectrum because this radiation is associated with electric and magnetic fields that transfer energy as they travel through
space. Because humans can see it, the most familiar part of the electromagnetic
spectrum is visible light—red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet.
Like expanding ripples in a pond after a pebble
has been tossed in, electromagnetic radiation
travels across space in the form of waves. These
waves travel at the speed of light—300,000 kilometers per second. Their wavelengths, the distance from wave crest to wave crest, vary from
thousands of kilometers across (in the case of
the longest radio waves) to fractions of a
nanometer, in the cases of the smallest x-rays
and gamma rays.

Electromagnetic radiation has properties of both
waves and particles. What we detect depends on the
method we use to study it. The beautiful colors that
appear in a soap film or in the dispersion of light
from a diamond are best described as waves. The
light that strikes a solar cell to produce an electric
current is best described as a particle. When
described as particles, individual packets of electromagnetic energy are called photons. The amount of
energy a photon of light contains depends upon its
wavelength. Electromagnetic radiation with long
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

23

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 24

billionth. Thus 700 nanometers is a distance
equal to 700 billionths or 7 x 10-7 meter.) Visible
light is a very narrow band of radiation ranging
from 400 to 700 nanometers. For comparison, it
would take 50 visible light waves arranged end to
end to span the thickness of a sheet of household
plastic wrap. Below visible light is the slightly
broader band of ultraviolet light that lies between
10 and 300 nanometers. X-rays follow ultraviolet
light and diminish into the hundred-billionth of
a meter range. Gamma rays fall in the trillionth of
a meter range.
The wavelengths of x-rays and gamma rays are so
tiny that scientists use another unit, the electron
volt, to describe them. This is the energy that an
electron gains when it falls through a potential
difference, or voltage, of one volt. It works out
that one electron volt has a wavelength of about
0.0001 centimeters. X-rays range from 100 electron volts (100 eV) to thousands of electron
volts. Gamma rays range from thousands of electron volts to billions of electron volts.

Using the Electromagnetic Spectrum

These two views of the constellation Orion dramatically illustrate the difference between what we are able to detect in visible light from Earth’s surface
and what is detectable in infrared light to a spacecraft in Earth orbit. Photo
Credits: Akira Fujii—visible light image; Infrared Astronomical Satellite—
infrared image.

wavelengths contains little energy. Electro-magnetic radiation with short wavelengths contains a great
amount of energy.
Scientists name the different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum according to their wavelengths. (See figure 1.) Radio waves have the
longest wavelengths, ranging from a few centimeters from crest to crest to thousands of kilometers.
Micro-waves range from a few centimeters to
about 0.1 cm. Infrared radiation falls between
700 nanometers and 0.1 cm. (Nano means one

24

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

All objects in space are very distant and difficult
for humans to visit. Only the Moon has been visited so far. Instead of visiting stars and planets,
astronomers collect electromagnetic radiation
from them using a variety of tools. Radio dishes
capture radio signals from space. Big telescopes
on Earth gather visible and infrared light.
Interplanetary spacecraft have traveled to all the
planets in our solar system except Pluto and have
landed on two. No spacecraft has ever brought
back planetary material for study. They send
back all their information by radio waves.
Virtually everything astronomers have learned
about the universe beyond Earth depends on the
information contained in the electromagnetic
radiation that has traveled to Earth. For example,
when a star explodes as in a supernova, it emits
energy in all wavelengths of the electromagnetic
spectrum. The most famous supernova is the
stellar explosion that became visible in 1054 and
produced the Crab Nebula. Electromagnetic

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 25

Figure 1: Electromagnetic Spectrum

radiation from radio to gamma rays has been
detected from this object, and each section of the
spectrum tells a different piece of the story.
For most of history, humans used only visible
light to explore the skies. With basic tools and
the human eye, we developed sophisticated
methods of time keeping and calendars.
Telescopes were invented in the 17th century.
Astronomers then mapped the sky in greater
detail––still with visible light. They learned
about the temperature, constituents, distribution, and the motions of stars.
In the 20th century, scientists began to explore the
other regions of the spectrum. Each region provided new evidence about the universe. Radio waves
tell scientists about many things: the distribution of
gases in our Milky Way Galaxy, the power in the
great jets of material spewing from the centers of
some other galaxies, and details about magnetic
fields in space. The first radio astronomers unexpectedly found cool hydrogen gas distributed
throughout the Milky Way. Hydrogen atoms are
the building blocks for all matter. The remnant
radiation from the Big Bang, the beginning of the
universe, shows up in the microwave spectrum.
Infrared studies (also radio studies) tell us about
molecules in space. For example, an infrared
search reveals huge clouds of formaldehyde in
space, each more than a million times more massive than the Sun. Some ultraviolet light comes
from powerful galaxies very far away. Astronomers

have yet to understand the highly energetic
engines in the centers of these strange objects.
Ultraviolet light studies have mapped the hot gas
near our Sun (within about 50 light years). The
high energy end of the spectrum—x-rays and
gamma rays—provide scientists with information
about processes they cannot reproduce here on
Earth because they lack the required power.
Nuclear physicists use strange stars and galaxies as a
laboratory. These objects are pulsars, neutron stars,
black holes, and active galaxies. Their study helps
scientists better understand the behavior of matter
at extremely high densities and temperatures in the
presence of intense electric and magnetic fields.
Each region of the electromagnetic spectrum provides a piece of the puzzle. Using more than one
region of the electromagnetic spectrum at a time
gives scientists a more complete picture. For
example, relatively cool objects, such as star-forming clouds of gas and dust, show up best in the
radio and infrared spectral region. Hotter objects,
such as stars, emit most of their energy at visible
and ultraviolet wavelengths. The most energetic
objects, such as supernova explosions, radiate
intensely in the x-ray and gamma ray regions.
There are two main techniques for analyzing
starlight. One is called spectroscopy and the
other photometry. Spectroscopy spreads out the
different wavelengths of light into a spectrum for
study. Photometry measures the quantity of light
in specific wavelengths or by combining all
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

25

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 26

RADIO
MICROWAVE

INFARED

VISIBLE

Transparency of Earth’s Atmosphere

UV

X-RAYS

GAMMA RAYS

400

200

50

12

6

3

SEA LEVEL

4

10

10

2

1

-2

-4

10

10

-6

10

-8

10

-10

10

10

-12

Wavelengths (meters)

Figure 2: Transparency of Earth’s Atmosphere

wavelengths. Astronomers use many filters in
their work. Filters help astronomers analyze particular components of the spectrum. For example, a red filter blocks out all visible light wavelengths except those that fall around 600
nanometers (it lets through red light).

Unit Goals
•
•

To investigate the visible light spectrum.
To demonstrate the relationship between energy
and wavelength in the electromagnetic spectrum.

Teaching Strategy
Unfortunately for astronomical research, Earth’s
atmosphere acts as a filter to block most wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum. (See
Unit 1.) Only small portions of the spectrum
actually reach the surface. (See figure 2.) More
pieces of the puzzle are gathered by putting
observatories at high altitudes (on mountain
tops) where the air is thin and dry, and by flying
instruments on planes and balloons. By far the
best viewing location is outer space.

26

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Because of the complex apparatus required to study
some of the wavelengths of the electromagnetic
spectrum and the danger of some of the radiation,
only the visible light spectrum will be studied in the
activities that follow. Several different methods for
displaying the visible spectrum will be presented.
Some of the demonstrations will involve sunlight,
but a flood or spotlight may be substituted. For best
results, these activities should be conducted in a
room where there is good control of light.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 27

ACTIVITY: Simple Spectroscope
Description:
A basic hand-held spectroscope is made from a
diffraction grating and a paper tube.
Objective:
To construct a simple spectroscope with a diffraction grating and use it to analyze the colors
emitted by various light sources.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Connections
Science
Systems, order, & organization
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Abilities of technological design
Technology
Understand engineering design
Materials:
Diffraction grating, 2-cm square (See management and tips section.)
Paper tube (tube from toilet paper roll)
Poster board square (5 by 10-cm)
Masking tape
Scissors
Razor blade knife
2 single-edge razor blades
Spectrum tubes and power supply (See
management and tips section.)
Pencil
Procedure:
1. Using the pencil, trace around the end of the
paper tube on the poster board. Make two
circles and cut them out. The circles should
be just larger than the tube’s opening.
2. Cut a 2-centimeter square hole in the center of
one circle. Tape the diffraction grating square
over the hole. If students are making their own
spectroscopes, it may be better if an adult cuts
the squares and the slot in step 4 below.
3. Tape the circle with the grating inward to
one end of the tube.
4. Make a slot cutter tool by taping two single-edge razor blades together with a piece

Light source
(not the Sun!)

Light
enters
slot

red

violet

violet

red

Visible Spectrum
appears to right
and left of
center line

Look through
diffraction
grating

of poster board between. Use the tool to
make parallel cuts about 2 centimeters
long across the middle of the second circle.
Use the razor blade knife to cut across the
ends of the cuts to form a narrow slot
across the middle of the circle.
5. Place the circle with the slot against the other
end of the tube. While holding it in place,
observe a light source such as a fluorescent
tube. Be sure to look through the grating end
of the spectroscope. The spectrum will appear
off to the side from the slot. Rotate the circle
with the slot until the spectrum is as wide as
possible. Tape the circle to the end of the tube
in this position. The spectroscope is complete.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

27

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 28

6. Examine various light sources with the spectroscope. If possible, examine nighttime street
lighting. Use particular caution when examining sunlight. Do not look directly into the Sun.
Background:
Simple spectroscopes, like the one described here,
are easy to make and offer users a quick look at
the color components of visible light. Different
light sources (incandescent, fluorescent, etc.) may
look the same to the naked eye but will appear
differently in the spectroscope. The colors are
arranged in the same order but some may be
missing and their intensity will vary. The appearance of the spectrum displayed is distinctive and
can tell the observer what the light source is.
Management and Tips:
The analytical spectroscope activity that follows
adds a measurement scale to the spectroscope
design. The scale enables the user to actually
measure the colors displayed. As will be
described in greater detail in that activity, the
specific location of the colors are like fingerprints
when it comes to identifying the composition of
the light source. Refer to the background and
management tips section for the Analytical
Spectroscope activity for information on how
diffraction gratings produce spectra.

28

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Spectroscopes can be made with glass prisms but
prisms are heavy. Diffraction grating spectroscopes can do the same job but are much lighter.
A diffraction grating can spread out the spectrum more than a prism can. This ability is called
dispersion. Because gratings are smaller and
lighter, they are well suited for spacecraft where
size and weight are important considerations.
Most research telescopes have some kind of grating spectrograph attached. Spectrographs are
spectroscopes that provide a record, photographic or digital, of the spectrum observed.
Many school science supply houses sell diffraction grating material in sheets or rolls.
One sheet is usually enough for every student
in a class to have a piece of grating to build his
or her own spectroscope. Holographic diffraction gratings work best for this activity. Refer
to the note on the source for holographic grating in the next activity. A variety of light
sources can be used for this activity, including
fluorescent and incandescent lights and spectra tubes with power supplies. Spectra tubes
and the power supplies are available from
school science supply catalogs. It may be possible to borrow tubes and supplies from another school if your school does not have them.
The advantage of spectrum tubes is that they

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 29

provide spectra from different gases such as
hydrogen and helium. When using the spectroscope to observe sunlight, students should
look at reflected sunlight such as light bouncing off clouds or light colored concrete. Other
light sources include streetlights (mercury,
low-pressure sodium, and high-pressure sodium), neon signs, and candle flames.

Assessment:
Compare student drawn spectra from different
light sources.
Extensions:
• How do astronomers measure the spectra of
objects in space? What do those spectra tell
us about these objects?
• Investigate other applications for the electromagnetic spectrum.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

29

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 30

Student Sheet - Simple Spectroscope
Name:

Use your spectroscope to analyze the colors of light given off by diferent
sources. Reproduce the spectra you observe with crayons or colored markers
in the spaces below. Identify the light sources. (When using the Sun as a
light source, do not look at it directly with your spectroscope. You can
harm your eye. Instead, look at sunlight reflected from a white cloud or a
sheet of white paper.)
Light Source: ______________________

Light Source: ______________________

Light Source _______________________

1. Describe how the spectra of the three light sources you studied differed
from each other. How were they similiar?

2. Would you be able to identify the light sources if you only saw their
visible spectra?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 31

ACTIVITY: Projecting Visible Spectra
Description:
Two methods for projecting the visible spectrum
are explained.
Objective:
To study the range of colors in the visible spectrum.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Connections
Science
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Materials:
Method 1
Flashlight (focusing kind)
Stiff poster board
2 single-edge razor blades
tape
Glass prism
Projection screen
Method 2
Overhead projector
Holographic diffraction grating (See next
page for sources.)
2 sheets of opaque paper
Tape
Projection screen
Procedure: Method 1
1. Make a partition with a narrow slot in its
center to block all but a narrow beam from
the flashlight. Cut out a 4 by 1-centimeter
vertical rectangle out from a 10 by 10-centimeter piece of poster board. Tape the two
single-edge razor blades to the poster board
so that their edges face each other and there
is a 1- to 2-millimeter gap between them.
2. Darken the classroom (the darker the better).
3. Brace the partition so that it stands upright
with the gap in the vertical direction.
4. Aim the flashlight beam at the screen and
focus it into a tight beam. Direct the beam
of the flashlight directly through the gap in

Prism
Narrow gap

Partition

the partition so that a narrow vertical slot of
light falls on the screen.
5. Stand the glass prism upright and place it in
the narrow beam of light on the opposite
side of the partition.
6. Slowly rotate the prism until the narrow slot
of light disperses the visible spectrum.
Depending upon the exact alignment, the
spectrum may fall on a wall rather than on
the screen. Adjust the setup so that the spectrum is displayed on the projection screen.
Procedure: Method 2
1. For this method, you must obtain a piece of
holographic diffraction grating—a grating
produced by accurate holographic techniques. See page 33 for the source of the
grating. Note: Method 2 will not work well
with a standard transmission grating.
2. Place two pieces of opaque paper on the
stage of an overhead projector so that they
are almost touching. There should be a
narrow gap between them that lets light
through. Aim the projector so that a narrow vertical beam of light falls on the projection screen.
3. Hang a square of holographic grating over
the projector lens with tape.
4. Darken the classroom (the darker the better).
5. Look for the color produced by the grating. It will fall on the screen or the wall on
both sides of the center line of the projector. You may have to adjust the aiming of
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

31

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 32

Holographic
Diffraction Grating

Off On

the projector to have one of the two spectra produced fall on the screen.
6. If the spectra produced is a narrow line of
color, rotate the holographic film 90 degrees
and remount it to the projector lens so that
a broad band of color is projected.
Background:
Visible light, passing through a prism at a suitable angle, is dispersed into its component colors. This happens because of refraction. When
visible light waves cross an interface between
two media of different densities (such as from
air into glass) at an angle other than 90
degrees, the light waves are bent (refracted).
Different wavelengths of visible light are bent
different amounts and this causes them to be
dispersed into a continuum of colors. (See diagram.)

Diffraction gratings also disperse light. There
are two main kinds of gratings. One transmits
light directly. The other is a mirror-like reflection grating. In either case, diffraction gratings
have thousands of tiny lines cut into their surfaces. In both kinds of gratings, the visible colors are created by constructive and destructive
interference. Additional information on how
diffraction gratings work is found in the
Analytical Spectroscope activity and in many
physics and physical science textbooks.
Management and Tips:
When projecting spectra, be sure to darken the
room as much as possible. If it is not possible to
darken the room, a large cardboard box can be
used as a light shield for method 1. Cut a small
peep-hole to examine the spectra. Method 2
produces a much larger spectra than method 1.
In both cases, the size of the spectral display can
be enlarged by increasing the distance from the
prism or diffraction grating to the screen. The
disadvantage of enlarging the display is that
only so much light is available from the light
source and increasing its dispersion diminishes
it intensity. A better light source for method 1
is the Sun. If you have a window with direct
sunlight, you can block most of the light except
for a narrow beam that you direct through the
gap in the partition. You will probably have to
place the partition with the slot on its side to
display a visible spectra. A slide projector can
also be used as a light source for method 1.
Refer to the Analytical Spectroscope activity for
more information on how the diffraction grating works.

White Light

Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Indigo
Violet

32

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 33

n
Su
lig
ht
t
ligh
Sun

Water Prism
Water

Assessment:
Have students use crayons or marker pens to sketch
the visible spectrum produced. Ask students to
identify each color present and to measure the
widths of each color band. Have them determine
which colors bend more and which bend less as
they come through the prism or diffraction grating.
Extensions:
• Who discovered the visible spectrum? How
many colors did the scientist see?
• A compact disk acts like a reflection diffraction grating. Darken the room and shine a
strong beam of white light from a flashlight
on the disk. The beam will be dispersed by
the grating and be visible on a wall.
• Construct a water prism out of four sheets of
glass. Glue the sheets together as shown in the
illustration with clear silicone aquarium
cement. When the cement is dry, fill the Vshaped trough with water and check for leaks.
Set the finished water prism in a window with
direct sunlight. A visible spectrum will appear

•

somewhere in the classroom. You can reposition the visible spectrum by bouncing the
sunlight off a mirror before it enters the prism
in order to change the sunlight angle.
A pocket mirror placed in a shallow pan of
water can also project a spectrum. Set up the
mirror and pan as shown in the illustration.

Sources:
Diffraction gratings are available from most
school science catalogs. Holographic diffraction
grating are available from:
Learning Technologies, Inc.
40 Cameron Avenue
Somerville, MA 02144
Phone: 1-800-537-8703
Reference:
Sadler, P. “Projecting Spectra for Classroom
Investigations,” The Physics Teacher, October
1991, 29(7), pp423–427.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

33

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

Student Work Sheet

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 34

Projecting Spectra

Name

Using colored markers or crayons and the chart below, reproduce the
electromagnetic spectrum as you see it. Be sure to maintain the
proportions of the color widths. Write the names of the colors beneath the
chart.

Which color bent the most after passing through the prism or diffraction grating?
Why?

Which color bent the least? Why?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 35

ACTIVITY: Cereal Box
Analytical Spectroscope
Description:
A spectroscope is constructed (from a cereal box
and diffraction grating) that permits the analysis
of visible light.
Objective:
To construct an analytical spectroscope and analyze the spectrum produced when various substances are heated or excited with electricity.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Data analysis, statistics, & probability
Science
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Abilities of technological design
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand engineering design
Materials:
Cereal box (13-15 ounce size)
Holographic diffraction grating (See the
Projecting Spectra activity for the source.)
Aluminum foil
Measurement scale
Marker pen
Ruler
Masking tape
Scissors
Razor blade knife
Cutting surface
Spectrum tubes and power supply (See the background and management tips section for information on sources.)
Procedure:
1. Cut a 2 by 2-centimeter window from the
bottom lid of the cereal box. The window
should be near one side.
2. Cut a second window from the upper box
lid directly above the lower window.

3. Cut a third window in the upper lid. This
window should be 1.5 by 10-centimeters in
size. Refer to the cutting diagram for placement information of the window.
4. Cut a piece of diffraction grating large
enough to cover the window in the box bottom. Handle the grating by the edges if possible; skin oils will damage it. Look at a fluorescent light through the grating. Turn the
grating so that the rainbow colors you see
appear in fat vertical bars to the right and
left of the light. Tape the grating in place.
2 by 2-cm
window
1.5 by 10-cm
window

rs

ta
gS

d

ste

Fro

in

Fall

rs

me

s

f
to

kfa

A

o
on
str

2 by 2-cm
window

rea

B

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

35

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 36

5. Place a 4 by 4-centimeter square of aluminum foil on a cutting surface. Cut a narrow slot into the foil with the razor blade
knife. If you made the slot-cutting tool for
the simple spectroscope activity, use it here
for cutting slots as well.
6. Tape the foil over the upper 2 by 2-centimeter hole in the box lid. The slot should be
positioned directly over the hole and aligned
perpendicular to the cereal box front.
7. Copy the black measurement ruler on an
overhead projector transparency. Several
rulers are reproduced in the guide to reduce
the number of transparencies needed.
8. Lightly tape the measurement ruler over the
rectangular window in the box lid. When
you look through the diffraction grating into

36

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

the box, you should be able to read the numbers on the ruler with 400 on the right and
700 on the left.
Adjusting and Calibrating the Spectroscope:
1. Aim the slot end of the spectroscope towards
a fluorescent light. Look through the diffraction grating. A continuous spectrum will be
seen off to the side of the spectroscope
falling under or partially on top of the measurement ruler. If the spectrum appears as a
narrow rainbow-colored line, remove the
diffraction grating from the window and
rotate it 90 degrees. Tape it back in place.
2. While looking at the fluorescent light, check
the position of the measurement ruler. There
will be a bright green line in the green portion

700

600

500

400

700

600

500

400

700

600

500

400

700

600

500

400

700

600

500

400

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 37

of the spectrum. Adjust the position of the
ruler so that the line falls between 540 and
550 on the ruler. Tape the ruler permanently
in place. The spectroscope is calibrated.
Background:
Unlike a prism, which disperses white light into
the rainbow colors through refraction, the diffraction grating used in this spectroscope disperses
white light through a process called interference.
The grating used in this activity consists of a transparent piece of plastic with many thousands of
microscopic parallel grooves. Light passing

between these grooves is dispersed into its component wavelengths and appears as parallel bands of
color on the retina of the eye of the observer.
Spectroscopes are important tools for astronomy.
They enable astronomers to analyze starlight by
providing a measure of the relative amounts of
red and blue light a star gives out. Knowing this,
astronomers can determine the star’s temperature. They also can deduce its chemical composition, estimate its size, and even measure its
motion away from or toward Earth (See the
activity Red Shift, Blue Shift.)

Basic Spectral Types

Hot opaque
source
Continuous spectrum

Hot transparent
gas cloud
Bright-line spectrum

Hot opaque
source
Absorption-line spectrum
Cooler transparent
gas cloud

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

37

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 38

Starlight (photons) originates from the interior
of a star. There, pressures are enormous and
nuclear fusion is triggered. Intense radiation is
produced as atoms, consisting of a surrounded
nucleus, collide with each other millions of times
each second. The number of collisions depends
upon the temperature of the gas. The higher the
temperature, the greater the rate of collision.
Because of these collisions, many electrons are
boosted to higher energy levels. This process is
called excitation. The electrons spontaneously
drop back to their original energy level. In doing
so, they release energy as photons. This is what
happens to the filament of an electric light bulb
or to an iron bar when it is heated in a furnace.
As the temperature of the filament rises, it begins
to radiate reddish light. When the filament
becomes much hotter, it radiates bluish light.
Thus, the color it radiates is an indicator of the
filament’s temperature. Stars that radiate a great
amount of red light are much cooler than stars
that radiate a great amount of blue light. Stellar
spectra therefore serve as star thermometers.
Excitation of electrons can also occur if they
absorb a photon of the right wavelength. This is
what happens when certain materials are exposed
to ultraviolet light. These materials then release
new photons at different wavelengths. This is
called fluorescence.
One of the important applications of spectroscopes is their use for identifying chemical elements. Each element radiates light in specific
wavelength combinations that are as distinctive
as fingerprints. Knowing the “spectral signatures” of each element enables astronomers to
identify the elements present in distant stars by
analyzing their spectra.
There are three kinds of spectra: continuous,
absorption, and emission. The continuous spectrum appears as a continuous band of color ranging from red to violet when observed through a
spectroscope. An absorption spectrum occurs
when the light from a star passes through a cloud
of gas, hydrogen for example, before reaching the
spectroscope. As a result, the hydrogen atoms

38

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

absorb some wavelengths of light. This selective
absorption produces a spectrum that is a broad
band of color interrupted by dark lines representing certain wavelengths of light that were
absorbed by the hydrogen cloud. Such a situation occurs when a star is located inside or
behind a gas cloud or nebula. An emission spectrum is observed when energy is absorbed by the
gas atoms in a nebula and is re-radiated by those
atoms at specific wavelengths. This spectrum
consists of bright lines against a black background. The light from fluorescent tubes and
neon lights produce emission spectra.
Stellar spectra allow astronomers to determine
star temperature, chemical composition, and
motion along the line of sight. This enables
astronomers to classify stars into spectral categories and estimate their age, reconstruct their
histories, and postulate their future evolution.
When available, astronomers prefer stellar spectra collected by orbiting spacecraft over spectra
collected by Earth-based telescopes since they are
not affected by atmospheric filtering and are
therefore more accurate. Included in the spectra
collected by spacecraft are infrared, ultraviolet, xray, and gamma ray bands that simply do not
reach ground-based spectroscopes.
Management and Tips:
This spectroscope works better with a holographic diffraction grating than with standard
diffraction gratings. Refer to the source for
holographic gratings listed in the Projecting
Spectrums activity. The spectroscope can be
used to analyze the wavelengths of light from
many light sources. Compare incandescent
light, fluorescent light, and sunlight. If you have
spectrum tubes and a power supply (available
from science supply houses), examine the wavelengths of light produced by the different gases
in the tubes. Many high school physics departments have this equipment and it may be possible to borrow it if your school does not. Use the
spectroscope to examine neon signs and streetlights. Science supply houses sell spectrum flame
kits consisting of various salts that are heated in
the flame of a Bunsen burner. These kits are
much less expensive than spectrum tubes but are

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 39

more difficult to work with because the flames
do not last very long.
This spectroscope can also be used to study the
spectrum of the Sun. Do not look directly at the
Sun with the spectroscope as this could damage
your eye. Instead, look at reflected sunlight such
as a white cloud or piece of white paper in sunlight (but not in a mirror!). When using the
spectroscope in a very dark environment with
spectrum tubes, it may be difficult to read the
measurement scale. A small flashlight aimed at a
white wall behind the spectrum power supply
will provide just enough light to read the ruler.
The first student page requires the use of spectrum tubes and a power supply. Have students
make spectrographs of five different spectrum
tubes. Randomly select one of the five tubes and
ask students to make a spectrograph of it. Tell the
students to identify this unknown element from
their previous spectrographs. The second student
page shows several typical bright line spectra from
spectrum tubes. This worksheet can be done without the tubes. It is important that students identify more than one line from each element shown in
the spectrograph. Some elements have several
lines in common. It is the entire combination of
lines that makes the identification possible.

Work Sheet 2 answers:
Spectrograph A: Hydrogen, Helium
Spectrograph B: Sodium, Barium, Lithium
Spectrograph C: Calcium, Helium, Hydrogen,
Oxygen, Krypton
Assessment:
Examine student spectroscopes to see if the gratings are properly aligned and the measurement
ruler is calibrated. Collect the student sheets and
compare student answers.
Extensions:
• Compare the solar spectrum at midday and
at sunset. Are there any differences? Caution:
Be careful not to look directly at the Sun.
• What do spectra tell us about the nature of
stars and other objects in space?
• Show how temperature and radiation are
related by connecting a clear light bulb to a
dimmer switch. Gradually increase the current passing through the filament by turning up the dimmer. Observe the color and
brightness of the filament as the temperature of the filament climbs with increasing
current.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

39

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 40

Student Work Sheet 2

Mystery Spectra
Name:______________

Use your spectroscope to examine the five elements displayed to you by your
teacher. Make sketches of the bright lines visible in the spaces below.
Element Name:______________

700

600

500

400

500

400

500

400

500

400

500

400

Element Name:______________

700

600

Element Name:______________

700

600

Element Name:______________

700

600

Element Name:______________

700

600

Use your spectroscope to examine the unknown element displayed to you by
your teacher. Make a sketch of the bright lines visible in the space below.
Compare your unknown element to the spectra above. Identify the element.
Element Name:______________

700

600

500

400

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 41

Student Work Sheet 2

Mystery Spectra
Name:______________

Identify the elements in spectra A, B, and C by comparing the bright lines present
with the bright lines in the spectra for know elements.

Calcium
Helium
Hydrogen
Lithium
Sodium
700

600

500

400

Krypton
Argon
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Barium

Spectra A

Elements:____________________________________________

Spectra B

Elements:____________________________________________

Spectra C

Elements:____________________________________________

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 42

ACTIVITY: Red Shift, Blue Shift
Description:
A Whiffle® ball containing a battery-operated
buzzer is twirled in a circle to demonstrate the
Doppler effect. This same effect causes starlight to
shift toward the blue or red end of the spectrum if
a star is moving towards or away from us.
Objective:
To demonstrate how stellar spectra can be used to
measure a star’s motion relative to Earth along the
line of sight.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Patterns, functions, & algebra
Geometry & spatial sense
Measurement
Data Analysis, statistics, & probability
Connections
Science
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Motions & forces
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Materials:
Plastic Whiffle® ball (12-15 cm in diameter)
Microswitch*
Small buzzer*
9-volt battery*
Cord (3 meters long)
Solder and soldering iron
Sharp knife or hacksaw blade
Masking tape

with the knife or saw blade.
3. Remove the nut from the microswitch and
insert the threaded shaft through one of the
holes as shown in the diagram. If a hole is
not present in the location shown, use a drill
to make one the correct diameter. Place the
nut back over the threaded shaft on the
microswitch and tighten.
4. Join the two halves of the ball together with
the switch, buzzer, and battery inside. Tape
the halves securely together.
5. Tie one end of the cord to the ball as shown.
6. Station students in a circle about 6 meters in
diameter. Stand in the middle of the students, turn on the buzzer, and twirl the ball
in a circle. Play out 2 to 3 meters of cord.
7. Ask the students to describe what they hear as
the ball moves towards and away from them.
8. Let different students try twirling the ball.
Ask them to describe what they hear.
As an alternate suggestion to the Whiffle® ball,
cut a cavity inside a foam rubber ball and insert
the battery and buzzer. The ball can then be
tossed from student to student while demonstrating the Doppler effect.

* See Management Tips note about electronic
parts.

Procedure:
1. Splice and solder the buzzer, battery clip, and
microswitch in a series circuit. See the wiring
diagram for details on the connections. Be
sure to test the circuit before soldering. Many
small buzzers require the electric current to
flow in one direction and will not work if the
current flows in the other direction.
2. Split the Whiffle® ball in half along the seam

42

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Buzzer
Small toggle
switch

9 volt battery
and battery
clip

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 43

Background:
This is a demonstration of the phenomenon called
the Doppler effect. It results from the motion of a
source (star) relative to the observer and causes its
spectra to be shifted toward the red (going away) or
toward the blue (coming towards) end of the spectra.
Like light, sound travels in waves and therefore
provides an excellent model of the wave behavior of
light. The number of waves reaching an observer in
one second is called the frequency. For a given
speed, frequency depends upon the length of the
wave. Long waves have a lower frequency than
short waves. As long as the distance between the
source of the waves and the observer remains constant, the frequency remains constant. However, if
the distance between the observer and the source is
increasing, the frequency will decrease. If the distance is decreasing, the frequency will increase.
Imagine that you are at a railroad crossing and a
train is approaching. The train is ringing a bell. The
sound waves coming from the bell are squeezed closer together than they would be if the train were still,
because of the train’s movement in your direction.
This squeezing of the waves increases the number of
waves (increases the frequency) that reach your ear
every second. But after the train’s engine passes the
crossing, the frequency diminishes and the pitch
lowers. In effect, the sound waves are stretched apart

Higher Frequency
(Blue Shift)

by the train’s movement in the opposite direction.
As the observer, you perceive these frequency
changes as changes in the pitch of the sound. The
sound’s pitch is higher as the train approaches and
lower as it travels away. The illustration below provides a graphical representation of what happens.

vr ∆λ
c = λ0
Vr - radial velocity of the source with respect to
the observer.
c - speed of light (3 x 105 km/sec)
∆λ the amount of the shift in nanometers
λ0- unshifted wavelength in nanometers
5

0.1 nm x 3x10 km /sec
= 50 km/sec
vr =
600 nm

For example, if a line in a spectrum should fall at
600.0 nanometers but instead lies at 600.1, what
would the radial velocity be?
The solution to this equation only tells us the velocity of the source relative to the spectroscope.
Whether the distance is increasing or decreasing is
revealed by the direction of the shift to the red or
blue end of the visible spectrum. It does not tell,
however, if one or both objects are moving relative
to some external reference point.

Lower Frequency
(Red Shift)

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

43

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 44

Management and Tips:
The amount of pitch change as the buzzer twirls is
directly related to how fast you twirl the buzzer.
Twirling the buzzer faster means that the buzzer
approaches and travels away from the observer
faster. The person twirling the buzzer does not hear
the pitch change no matter how fast the buzzer is
twirled; it remains the same distance from the
twirler. The observers standing away from the
twirler will hear the pitch change as the buzzer goes
toward and away from the observer’s ear.
Note About Electronic Parts:
The electronic parts for this device are not specified exactly since there are many combinations
that will work. Go to an electronic parts store
and select a buzzer, battery holder, battery, and
switch from what is available. Remember to purchase parts that will fit in a Whiffle® ball. The
store clerk should be able to help you make a
workable selection if you need assistance. If possible, test the buzzer before purchasing it to
determine if it is loud enough. Test the buzzer
and battery before soldering connections. The
buzzer may be polarized. Reverse the connections if you do not hear a sound the first time.
Answers to Work Sheets:
Sheet 1
1. The greater the difference in the pitch above
or below the normal pitch, the faster the
vehicle is moving.
2. A – lower, B – higher, C – the same
3. Stars moving toward us become slightly bluer.
Stars moving away become slightly redder.

4. Astronomers look at the spectrograph of a
star and compare the position of bright lines
in the spectrograph with where the lines
should be if the star were not moving at all.
A shift to the red end of the spectrum indicates a star is moving away and a shift
toward the blue end indicates the star is
moving towards us. The amount of the shift
indicates relative velocity. The greater the
shift, the greater the velocity.
5. No. The movement can be determined if the
distance to the star is known. How fast the star
moves against the background of more distant
stars can be measured and the speed of the star
calculated.
Sheet 2
Star 1 – 100 km/sec away
Star 2 – 260.7 km/sec toward
Star 3 – 418.6 km/sec away
Assessment:
Collect student worksheets and compare the
answers.
Extensions:
• Can the red/blue shift technique be used for
objects other than stars? Can you tell which
way an emergency vehicle is traveling by the
pitch of its siren?
• Transverse velocity is a motion that is perpendicular to radial velocity. Can this
motion be detected by the Doppler effect?
• What has the Doppler effect told
astronomers about the size of the universe?

Same star Blue Shifted (moving toward us)

Simplified Star Spectrum

Same star Red Shifted (moving away from us)

400

44

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

450

500

550

600

650

700

750

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 45

Student Work Sheet 1

Red Shift, Blue Shift
Name:

________________

1. How can you estimate the speed of a car that has passed you just by listening
to the pitch of its whine?

2. Label the diagram below and tell if the observer perceives a pitch that is higher,
lower, or just the same as the pitch heard by the driver.

C: _________

A: _________

B: _________
3. How does the doppler shift affect the color of a star?

4. Describe how astronomers can use the doppler shift to determine if a star
is moving toward us or away and how fast?

5. If a star is moving perpendicular to our line of sight, can you use the
doppler shift to determine its speed? If not, how might you determine
its speed?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 46

Student Work Sheet 2

Red Shift, Blue Shift
Name:

________________

Use the equation below to determine the velocity of several stars
whose spectra have shifted. Are the stars moving toward
or away from us? Show your work on the back side of this page.

vr = ∆λ x c
vr
c

λ0

= radial velocity
5

= speed of light (3x10 km/sec or 300,000 km/sec)

∆λ = amount of shift in nanometers
λ0 = unshifted wavelength in nanometers
Star 1: The spectrum has shifted from 600.0 to 600.2 nm
Velocity = ________ km/sec
Moving toward or away from us? ____________
Star 2: The spectrum has shifted from 575.3 to 574.8 nm
Velocity = ________ km/sec
Moving toward or away from us? ____________
Star 3: The spectrum has shifted from 501.6 to 502.3 nm
Velocity = ________ km/sec
Moving toward or away from us? ____________

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 47

ACTIVITY: Wavelength and Energy
Description:
Shaking a rope permits students to feel the relationship between wavelength, frequency, and
energy.
Objective:
To demonstrate the relationship between wave
frequency and energy in the electromagnetic
spectrum.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Data analysis, statistics, & probability
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Motions & forces
Transfer of energy
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Materials:
Rope – 50-ft. length of cotton clothesline
Tape measure
Stopwatch or clock with second hand
Procedure:
1. Select two students to hold the rope. Have
each student stand in an aisle or in opposite
corners of the classroom so that the rope is
taut between them.
2. While one end of the rope is held still, have
the other student shake the opposite end up
and down at a moderate but steady rate.

3. Ask other students to observe the wave patterns created in the rope. Point out wave crests
and troughs. Ask your students to measure the
wavelength and frequency of waves reaching the
other student. The wavelength is the distance
from wave crest to wave crest (or wave trough
to wave trough). The wavelength can be measured by having one student stand next to the
rope where a wave crest is repeatedly formed
and having a second student stand where the
next crest is formed. Measure the distance
between the students. Frequency is the number of waves reaching the far end of the rope
each second. Frequency can be estimated by
counting the number of times the student
shakes the rope each second.
4. Tell the student shaking the rope to shake it
faster. Again estimate the wavelength and
frequency.
5. Tell the student shaking the rope to shake
the rope as fast as he or she can. Again, estimate the wavelength and frequency.
6. Stop the demonstration and ask the student
shaking the rope if it is easier to produce low
frequency (long wavelength) or high frequency (short wavelength) waves.
Background:
This activity provides a graphic demonstration
of the relationship between energy and wavelength. The student shaking the rope will find
that creating many waves each second takes
much more energy than producing only a few
waves per second. High-frequency waves (short
wavelength) represent more energy than low-frequency (long wavelength) waves. Astronomers
find the relationship between wavelengths, frequency, and energy very useful. Radio waves

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

47

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 48

E = hc
λ
E = hf
Planck’s Constant = 6.63 x 10--34 J . s
f is the frequency in hertz
λ is the wavelength in meters
from astronomical objects have very long wavelengths and low frequencies. The waves are generated by relatively quiet processes. Gamma rays,
on the other end of the electromagnetic spectrum, have very short wavelengths and high frequencies and represent the most violent processes in space. The frequency of electromagnetic
energy coming from an object tells astronomers
much about how that object was created and
what was happening at the time the energy was
emitted into space.
Management and Tips:
The quality of the demonstrations can be greatly enhanced by using a wave demonstration
spring. These springs are available from school
science supply catalogs for a few dollars. The
springs are long coils and when stretched and

48

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

agitated, produce excellent waves. The increased
mass of the spring over the cotton clothesline
enhances the wave motions. If a strobe light is
available, the appearance of the wave motions
can be enhanced by playing the light on the
moving rope or spring and adjusting the strobe
frequency. A Slinky® can also be used to demonstrate wave motion but it will work best if the
Slinky® is placed on a long table and the spring
is shaken from side to side.
Permit other students to shake the rope so they
can feel, as well as see, the relationship between
frequency, wavelength, and energy.
Assessment:
Make sure students understand the relationship
between frequency and wavelength and the
amount of energy required to produce the waves.
Collect and compare the student sheets.
Extensions:
• Invite a hospital medical imaging specialist
to talk to the class about the use of high-frequency electromagnetic waves in medical
diagnosis.
• Make an overhead projector transparency of
the spectrum chart on page 00. Ask the students to relate energy to the electromagnetic
wavelengths depicted.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 49

ACTIVITY: Resonating Atmosphere
Description:
Students construct a paper and tape device that
demonstrates the property of resonance.
Objective:
To show how atoms and molecules of gas in
Earth’s atmosphere absorb electromagnetic energy through resonance.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Change, constancy, & measurement
Motion & forces
Transfer of energy
Structure of the Earth system
Materials:
Used lightweight file folder
Cardboard sheet about 20 by 30 cm
Masking tape
Scissors
Procedure:
1. Cut two strips of paper from the file folder.
Each strip should be 3 cm wide. Make one
strip approximately 30 cm and the other
35 cm long.
2. Curl each strip into a cylinder and tape the
ends together.
3. Tape the cylinders to the cardboard as shown
in the diagram.
4. Holding the cardboard along one of its
edges, slowly shake the rings back and forth.
Observe the movements of the rings as you
gradually increase the frequency (rate) of the
shaking.
Background:
All objects and materials have a natural frequency at which they vibrate. With some materials,
the vibration is easily observed. Many students
have discovered that a plastic ruler extended over
the edge of a desk will vibrate when it is deflected and released. If the extension of the ruler over
the desk edge is reduced, the frequency of the

vibration is increased. When students shake the
cardboard and paper rings, the number of times
it moves back and forth in a second is the frequency. At first, the movement of the rings will
be erratic. However, by increasing or decreasing
the frequency of the shaking, the students will
eventually match the natural frequency of one of
the rings. That ring will begin bouncing back and
forth in time with the shaking. The movement of
the other ring will continue to be erratic until its
frequency is matched. When that happens, the
first ring’s movement will become erratic again.
As the frequency of one of the rings is matched,
it absorbs some of the energy the student is
adding into the system through shaking. The
absorption only occurs when the correct frequency is reached. This effect is called resonance.
Resonance takes place when energy of the right
frequency (or multiples of the right frequency) is
added to an object causing it to vibrate.
When electromagnetic radiation enters Earth’s
atmosphere, certain wavelengths match the natural frequencies of atoms and molecules of various atmospheric gases such as nitrogen and
ozone. When this happens, the energy in those
wavelengths is absorbed by those atoms or molecules, intercepting this energy before it reaches
Earth’s surface. Wavelengths that do not match
the natural frequencies of these atmospheric constituents pass through.
Resonance is important to astronomy for another reason. All starlight begins in the center of the
star as a product of nuclear fusion. As the radiation emerges from the photosphere or surface of
the star, some wavelengths of radiation may be
missing. The missing components produce dark
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

49

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 50

lines, called absorption lines, in the star’s spectra.
The lines are created as the radiation passes
through the outer gaseous layers of the star.
Some of that radiation will be absorbed as various gas atoms present there resonate. Absorption
lines tell what elements are present in the outer
gaseous layers of the star.

See the extensions below for other ways of
demonstrating resonance.

Management and Tips:
Students may experience a little difficulty in
making the paper ring resonator work at first.
The main thing is to be consistent in the shaking
of the rings. Although they will be changing
from low to high frequencies, after the changes
are made, the frequencies should be held constant and vary significantly. Erratic shaking will
produce erratic movement in the rings.

Extensions:
• Resonance can be demonstrated in a number of ways. If you have sympathetic tuning
forks (available from school science supply
companies), arrange the bases so that they
face each other. Strike one fork and the other
fork, set to the same frequency, will begin
vibrating as well. Touch the first fork to
dampen its vibration and you will hear the

Assessment:
Ask students to explain the concept of resonance
and how it applies to electromagnetic radiation
coming to Earth from space.

Sympathetic Tuning Forks

50

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 51

•

•

•

•

sound produced by the second fork even
though you did not strike. The second fork
will absorb energy from the first fork and
begin vibrating as well.
Construct a hacksaw blade resonator. Make
a small handle of 1/4-inch plywood or 1/8inch masonite. Tape two hacksaw blades to
the handle as shown. Use a 10-inch and a
12-inch hacksaw blade. Add colored tape or
paint the ends of the blades to make them
more visible. Shake the handle from side to
side. The handle should be held vertically so
that the flat side of the blades is perpendicular to the movement. Like the paper ring
device, the blades will begin moving when
their natural frequencies are matched.
Investigate the natural frequencies of various
objects such as bells, wine goblets, and tuning forks.
Why has the playing of the song “Louie,
Louie” been banned at several college football stadiums? Why do marching soldiers
crossing a bridge “break cadence?”
What gas in Earth’s upper atmosphere
blocks ultraviolet radiation? Why is that
important?

Hacksaw Blade
Resonator

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

51

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 52

Student Work Sheet

Resonating Atmosphere
Name:
1. Describe what happened to the paper rings as you shook the cardboard
base back and forth.

2. What happened when you increased the frequency of the shaking motion?

3. What happened when you decreased the frequency of the shaking motion?

4. Which ring requires the higher-frequency to
Higher / Lower
move in phase with the shaking motion?
Which ring moves in phase with the
lower-frequency shaking motion?
Circle the correct answer.
Higher / Lower

5. Define resonance. You may use the experiment with the paper rings
in your explanation.

6. Explain how resonance of some of the atoms and molecules in Earth’s
atmosphere interferes with astronomical observations.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 53

UNIT 3
COLLECTING
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION
Introduction
Except for rock samples brought back from the Moon by Apollo astronauts, cosmic ray
particles that reach the atmosphere, and meteorites and comet dust that fall to Earth, the
only information about objects in space comes to Earth in the form of electromagnetic
radiation. How astronomers collect this radiation determines what they learn from it. The
most basic collector is the human eye. The retina at the back of the eye is covered with
tiny antennae—called rods and cones—that resonate with incoming light. Resonance
with visible electromagnetic radiation stimulates nerve endings, which send messages
to the brain that are interpreted as visual images. Cones in the retina are sensitive to the
colors of the visible spectrum, while the rods are most sensitive to black and white.
Until the early 1600s, astronomers had only
their eyes and a collection of geometric devices
to observe the universe and measure locations
of stellar objects. They concentrated on the
movements of planets and transient objects
such as comets and meteors. However, when
Galileo Galilei used the newly invented tele-

scope to study the Moon, planets, and the Sun,
our knowledge of the universe changed dramatically. He was able to observe moons circling
Jupiter, craters on the Moon, phases of Venus,
and spots on the Sun. Note: Galileo did his
solar observations by projecting light through
his telescope on to a white surface—a technique
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

53

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 54

that is very effective even today. Never look
directly at the Sun!
Galileo’s telescope and all optical telescopes that
have been constructed since are collectors of
electromagnetic radiation. The objective or front
lens of Galileo’s telescope was only a few centimeters in diameter. Light rays falling on that
lens were bent and concentrated into a narrow
beam that emerged through a second lens,
entered his eye, and landed on his retina. The
lens diameter was much larger than the diameter
of the pupil of Galileo’s eye, so it collected much
more light than Galileo’s unaided eye could gather. The telescope’s lenses magnified the images of
distant objects three times.
Since Galileo’s time, many huge telescopes have
been constructed. Most have employed big mirrors as the light collector. The bigger the mirror
or lens, the more light could be gathered and the
fainter the source that the astronomer can detect.
The famous 5-meter-diameter Hale Telescope on
Mt. Palomar is able to gather 640,000 times the
amount of light a typical eye could receive. The
amount of light one telescope receives compared
to the human eye is its light gathering power
(LGP). Much larger even than the Hale
Telescope is the Keck Telescope that has an effective diameter of 10 meters. Its light gathering
power is two and a half million times that of the
typical eye. Although NASA’s Hubble Space
Telescope, in orbit above Earth’s atmosphere, has
only a LGP of 144,000, it has the advantage of
an unfiltered view of the universe. Furthermore,
its sensitivity extends into infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths.
Once a telescope collects photons, the detection
method becomes important. Telescopes are collectors, not detectors. Like all other telescopes,
the mirror of the Hubble Space Telescope is a
photon collector that gathers the photons to a
focus so a detector can pick them up. It has several filters that move in front of the detector so
images can be made at specific wavelengths.
In the early days, astronomers recorded what
they saw through telescopes by drawing pictures

54

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

and taking notes. When photography was
invented, astronomers replaced their eyes with
photographic plates. A photographic plate is
similar to the film used in a modern camera
except that the emulsion was supported on glass
plates instead of plastic. The emulsion collected
photons to build images and spectra.
Astronomers also employed the photo-multiplier
tube, an electronic device for counting photons.
The second half of this century saw the development of the Charge Coupled Device (CCD), a
computer-run system that collects photons on a
small computer chip. CCDs have now replaced
the photographic plate for most astronomical
observations. If astronomers require spectra, they
insert a spectrograph between the telescope and
the CCD. This arrangement provides digital
spectral data.
Driving each of these advances was the need for
greater sensitivity and accuracy of the data.
Photographic plates, still used for wide-field
studies, collect up to about five percent of the
photons that fall on them. A CCD collects 85 to
95 percent of the photons. Because CCDs are
small and can only observe a small part of the sky
at a time, they are especially suited for deep space
observations.
Because the entire electromagnetic spectrum represents a broad range of wavelengths and energies (see illustration on page 55), no one detector can record all types of radiation. Antennas are
used to collect radio and microwave energies. To
collect very faint signals, astronomers use large
parabolic radio antennas that reflect incoming
radiation to a focus much in the same way reflector telescopes collect and concentrate light.
Radio receivers at the focus convert the radiation
into electric currents that can be studied.
Sensitive solid state heat detectors measure
infrared radiation, higher in energy and shorter
in wavelength than radio and microwave radiation. Mirrors in aircraft, balloons, and orbiting
spacecraft can concentrate infrared radiation
onto the detectors that work like CCDs in the
infrared range. Because infrared radiation is

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 55

RADIO
MICROWAVE

INFARED

VISIBLE

Transparency of Earth’s Atmosphere

UV

X-RAYS

GAMMA RAYS

400

200

50

12

6

3

SEA LEVEL

4

10

10

2

1

-2

10

-4

10

-6

10

-8

10

-10

10

10

-12

Wavelengths (meters)

associated with heat, infrared detectors must
be kept at very low temperatures lest the telescope’s own stored heat energy interferes with
the radiation coming from distant objects.
A grazing-incidence instrument consists of a
mirrored cone that directs high-energy radiation
to detectors placed at the mirror’s apex. Different
mirror coatings are used to enhance the reflectivity of the mirrors to specific wavelengths.
X-ray spacecraft, such as the Chandra X-ray
Observatory, also use grazing-incidence mirrors
and solid state detectors while gamma ray spacecraft use a detector of an entirely different kind.

The Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory has
eight 1-meter-sized crystals of sodium iodide
that detect incoming gamma rays as the observatory orbits Earth. Sodium iodide is sensitive to
gamma rays but not to optical and radio wavelengths. The big crystal is simply a detector of
photons—it does not focus them.
Today, astronomers can choose to collect and
count photons, focus the photons to build up an
image, or disperse the photons into their various
wavelengths. High-energy photons are usually
detected with counting techniques. The other
wavelengths are detected with counting (photometry), focusing methods (imaging), or disSpace-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

55

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 56

persion methods (spectroscopy). The particular
instrument or combination of instruments
astronomers choose depends not only on the
spectral region to be observed, but also on the
object under observation. Stars are point sources
in the sky. Galaxies are not. So the astronomer
must select a combination that provides good
stellar images or good galaxy images.
Another important property of astronomical
instruments is resolution. This is the ability to
separate two closely-spaced objects from each
other. For example, a pair of automobile headlights appears to be one bright light when seen
in the distance along a straight highway. Close
up, the headlights resolve into two. Since telescopes, for example, have the effect of increasing the power of our vision, they improve our
resolution of distant objects as well. The design
and diameter of astronomical instruments
determines whether the resolution is high or
low. For stellar work, high resolution is important so the astronomer can study one star at a

56

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

time. For galaxy work, the individual stars in a
galaxy may often not be as important as the
whole ensemble of stars.
Unit Goals
• To demonstrate how electromagnetic radiation can be collected and detected through
the use of mirrors, lenses, and infrared
detectors.
• To illustrate how the use of large instruments for collecting electromagnetic radiation increases the quantity and quality of
data collected.
Teaching Strategy
Because many of the wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum are difficult or dangerous to
work with, activities in this section concentrate
on the visible spectrum, the near infrared, and
radio wavelengths. Several of the activities involve
lenses and mirrors. The Visible Light Collector
activity provides many tips for obtaining a variety
of lenses and mirrors at little or no cost.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 57

ACTIVITY: Visible Light Collectors
(Telescopes)
Description:
A simple refractor telescope is made from a mailing tube, Styrofoam tray, rubber cement, and
some lenses and the principle behind a reflector
telescope is demonstrated.
Objectives:
To build a simple astronomical telescope from
two lenses and some tubes.
To use a concave mirror to focus an image.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Measurement
Connections
Science
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities of technological design
Understanding about science & technology
History of science
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand cultural, social, economic, &
political effects of technology
Understand the influence of technology on
history
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies
Materials:
Paper mailing tube (telescoping—1 inside
tube and 1 outside tube)
Styrofoam trays (1 thick and 1 thin)
Lenses (1 large and 1 small. See note about
lenses.)
Metric ruler
Razor blade knife
Cutting surface
Marker pen
Rubber cement
Fine grade sandpaper
Concave makeup mirror
Electric holiday candle or other small light
source

Dark room
Sheet of white paper
Assorted convex lenses (See section on
Obtaining and Making Lenses and
Mirrors.)
Part 1 - Procedure for Making a Refractor
Telescope:
1. Cut a short segment from the end of the outside mailing tube. This circle will be used for
tracing only. Place the circle from the larger
tube on the thick tray. Using a marker pen,
trace the inside of the circle on to the bottom
of the tray three times.
2. Lay the large (objective) lens in the center of
one of the three large circles. Trace the lens’
outline on the circle.
3. Cut the circle with the lens tracing from the
tray using the razor blade knife. Be sure to
place the Styrofoam on a safe cutting surface.
Cut out the lens tracing, but when doing so,
cut inside the line so that the hole is slightly
smaller than the diameter of the lens.
4. Before cutting out the other two large circles, draw smaller circles inside them
approximately equal to 7/8ths of the diameter of the large lens. Cut out both circles
inside and out.
5. Coat both sides of the inner circle (the one
that holds the lens) with rubber cement and
let dry. Coat just one side each of the other
two circles with cement and let dry. For a
better bond, coat again with glue and let dry.
6. Insert the lens into the inner circle. It will be
snug. Press the other circles to either side. Be
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

57

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 58

Lenses and Mirrors
Double Convex Lens

Converging Lens
Double Concave Lens

Diverging Lens
Plano Convex Lens

Converging Lens

Converging Mirror

Concave Mirror
Convex Mirror

Converging Mirror

careful to align the circles properly. Because
the outside circles have smaller diameters
than the lens, the lens is firmly held in place.
You have completed the objective lens
mounting assembly.
7. Repeat steps 1- 6 for the inside tube and use
the smaller lens for tracing. However,
because the eyepiece lens is thinner than the
objective lens, cut the inner circle from the
thin tray.
8. After both lens mounting assemblies are
complete, lay the fine sandpaper on a flat surface and gradually sand the edges of each
completed lens mounting assembly to make
them smooth. Stop sanding when the assemblies are just larger than the inside diameter
of the corresponding tube. With a small
amount of effort, the assembly will compress
slightly and slip inside the tube. (Do not
insert them yet.) Friction will hold them in
place. If the lens assemblies get too loose,
they can be held firmly with glue or tape.

58

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Diverging Mirror

9. Hold the two lens assemblies up and look
through the lenses. Adjust their distances
apart and the distance to your eye until an
image comes into focus. Look at how far the
two lenses are from each other. Cut a segment from the outside and the inside tube
that together equal two times the distance
you just determined when holding up the
lenses. Use the sandpaper to smooth any
rough edges on the tubes after cutting.
10. Carefully, so as not to smudge the lenses,
insert the large lens assembly into one end
of the outside tube and the eyepiece lens
assembly into the end of the inside tube.
Slip the inside tube into the outside tube
so that the lenses are at opposite ends.
Look through the eyepiece towards some
distant object and slide the small tube in
and out of the large tube until the image
comes into focus.
11. (Optional) Decorate the outside tube with
marker pens or glue a picture to it.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 59

Background:
The completed telescope is known as a refractor.
Refractor means that light passing through the
objective lens is bent (refracted) before reaching
the eyepiece. Passing through the eyepiece, the
light is refracted again.
This refraction inverts the image. To have an
upright image, an additional correcting lens or
prism is placed in the optical path. Astronomers
rarely care if images are right-side-up or up-sidedown. A star looks the same regardless of orientation. However, correcting images requires the
use of extra optics that diminish the amount of
light collected. Astronomers would rather have
bright, clear images than right-side-up images.
Furthermore, images can be corrected by inverting and reversing photographic negatives or correcting the image in a computer.
Management and Tips:
Refer to the end of this activity for ideas on how
to obtain suitable lenses. PVC plumbing pipes
can be used for the telescoping tubes. Purchase
tube cutoffs of different diameters at a hardware
store. Make sure the cutting of the outside circles
in the Styrofoam is precise. A circle cut too small
will fall through the tube. If students do cut circles too small, the diameter of the circles can be
increased by adding one or more layers of masking tape.

then focuses the light onto a detector. The concave mirror used in this demonstration shows how
a concave mirror can concentrate light to form a
recognizable image. The image produced with a
makeup mirror will not be well focused because
such mirrors are inexpensively produced from
molded glass rather than from carefully shaped
and polished glass. Furthermore, proper focusing
requires that the mirror be precisely shaped in a
parabolic curve.
Reflecting telescope mirrors can be made very
large and this increases the amount of light they
can capture. Refer to the telescope performance
activity that follows for information on light
gathering power. Small telescopes can only detect
bright or nearby stars. Large telescopes (over 4
meters in diameter) can detect objects several billion times fainter than the brightest stars visible
to our naked eyes.
Large astronomical telescopes do not employ
eyepieces. Rather, light falls on photographic
film, photometers, or charged coupled devices
(CCDs). This demonstration shows how an
image forms on a flat surface. Covering the

Hubble Space Telescope Optics
Secondary Mirror
Primary Mirror

Part 2 - Procedure for Demonstrating the
Reflector Telescope Principle:
1. Light the electric candle in a darkened room.
2. Bring the concave makeup mirror near the
candle flame and tilt and turn it so that
reflected light from the lamp focuses on a
sheet of white paper.
3. Experiment with different lenses to find one
suitable for turning the makeup mirror into
a simple reflector telescope. Hold the lens
near your eye and move it until the reflected
light from the mirror comes into focus.

Light Baffles

Focal Plane

Background:
Many reflecting telescopes gather light from distant objects with a large concave mirror that
directs the light toward a secondary mirror which
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

59

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

60

2/28/01

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

8:54 AM

Page 60

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 61

surface with photographic film will produce a
crude picture. Although astronomers have converted to CCDs for most observations, photography is still employed for some applications. Rather than film, astronomers usually
prefer photographic emulsions on sheets of
glass, which are more stable over time.
Assessment:
Examine the telescope for construction technique. Are the lenses parallel or canted to each
other? Can the telescope focus on an image? Use
the telescopes made here as samples for the telescope performance activities that follow.
Extensions:
• Bring commercially-made telescopes, spyglasses, and binoculars into the classroom.
Compare magnification, resolution, and
light gathering power to that of the telescope
made here. Learn how these optical instruments function.
• Invite local amateur astronomy clubs to host
“star parties” for your students.
• Why are the largest astronomical telescopes
made with big objective mirrors rather than
big objective lenses?
• Find out how different kinds of reflecting telescopes such as the Newtonian, Cassegrain,
and Coude work.

Obtaining and Making Lenses and Mirrors:
An amazing collection of lenses and mirrors can
be obtained at little or no cost through creative
scrounging. Ask an optometrist or eyewear store
if they will save damaged eyeglass lenses for you.
Although not of a quality useful for eyewear,
these lenses are very suitable for classroom experimentation. Bifocals and trifocals make fascinating magnifying lenses. Fill a spherical glass flask
with water to make a lens. Water-filled cylindrical glass or plastic bottles make magnifiers that
magnify in one direction only. Aluminized mylar
plastic stretched across a wooden frame makes a
good front surface plane mirror. A Plexiglas mirror can be bent to make a “funhouse” mirror.
Low-reflectivity plane mirrors can be made from
a sheet glass backed with black paper. Ask the
person in charge of audiovisual equipment at the
school to save the lenses from any broken or old
projectors that are being discarded. Projector and
camera lenses are actually made up of many lenses sandwiched together. Dismantle the lens
mounts to obtain several usable lenses. Check
rummage sales and flea markets for binoculars
and old camera lenses. A wide assortment of
lenses and mirrors are also available for sale from
school science supply catalogs and from the following organization:
Optical Society of America
2010 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 223-8130

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

61

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 62

ACTIVITY: Telescope Performance
Description:
Students compare and calculate the light gathering power of lenses.
Objective:
To determine the ability of various lenses and
mirrors to gather light.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Patterns, functions, & algebra
Geometry & spatial sense
Measurement
Problem solving
Connections
Science
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand characteristics & scope of technology
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies
Materials:
Gray circles on page 00
White paper punchouts from a three-hole
paper punch
White paper
Double convex lenses of different diameters
Metric ruler
Small telescope from previous activity
Binoculars (optional)
Overhead projector
Transparency copy of master on page 00
Resolving Power chart on page 00
Astronomical telescope (optional)
Procedure – Light Gathering Power:
1. Have students examine several different
double convex lenses.
2. Compare the ability of each lens to gather
light by focusing the light from overhead fixtures onto a piece of white paper. Which lens
produces a brighter image? Be sure to hold
the lenses parallel to the paper.
3. Compare the light gathering power of five

62

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

imaginary lenses (gray circles) by placing
small white paper circles (punchouts) on
each. The number of punchouts represents
the number of photons collected at a
moment of time. Students may draw their
own circles with compasses for this step.
4. What is the mathematical relationship
between the number of punchouts that a circle can hold and the circle’s diameter? How
did you arrive at this conclusion?
Procedure – Magnification:
1. Make an overhead transparency of the grid on
page 68. Project the transparency on a screen
so that it is as large as possible and position
the projector to reduce the “keystone” effect.
2. Roll a paper tube the same diameter as the
front end of the telescope or binocular lens
you are using. The length of the tube should
be the same length as the telescope or binocular. Because binoculars use prisms to reduce
their size (see illustration), make the tube two
times longer than the distance between the
front and rear lenses of the binoculars.
3. Have students stand in the middle or rear of
the room. They should stand at a distance
that will permit the telescope or binoculars to
focus on the screen. Many optical instruments have minimum focal distances.
4. Looking first through the tube, have students
count the number of squares they can see at a
time from one side of the tube to the other.
5. Using the binoculars (one eye only) or the telescope, have students repeat the counting of
squares.
6. The ratio of the number of squares seen in the
tube versus the number seen in the binoculars
is a rough approximation of the magnification
power of the instrument. For example, if the
student can see three squares with the tube
and only one with the telescope, the magnification power of the telescope is approximately
3 because a single square spanned the telescope instead of three squares with a tube of a
similar diameter and length.
Procedure – Resolving Power:
1. Tape page 63 to the front board.
2. Have students stand near the rear of the room

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 63

1
2

4

8

16

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

63

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 64

Magnification Grid

64

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 65

2

LGPA

100 cmA
10,000
=
=
= 100
10
cm
100
LGPB
B

and look at the dots. Ask them to look at the
squares and state how many dots they see.
3. Have students repeat the observation with
the aid of a telescope or binoculars.
Background:
Light Gathering Power – In a dark room, the
pupil of the eye gets bigger to collect more of the
dim light. In bright sunlight, the pupil gets
smaller so that too much light is not let into the
eye. A telescope is a device that effectively makes
the pupil as large as the objective lens or mirror.
A telescope with a larger objective lens (front
lens) or objective mirror collects and concentrates more light than a telescope with a smaller
lens or mirror. Therefore, the larger telescope has
a greater light gathering power than the smaller
one. The mathematical relationship that expresses light gathering power (LGP) follows:
2

LGPA
LGPB

=

DA
DB

In this equation, A represents the larger telescope
and B the smaller telescope or human eye. The
diameter of the objective lens or mirror for each telescope is represented by D. Solving this equation
yields how much greater the light gathering power
(LGP) of the bigger telescope is over the smaller
one. For example, if the diameter of the large telescope is 100 cm and the smaller telescope is 10 cm,
the light gathering power of the larger telescope will
be 100 times greater than that of the smaller scope.
Light gathering power is an important measure of
the potential performance of a telescope. If an
astronomer is studying faint objects, the telescope

used must have sufficient light gathering power
to collect enough light to make those objects visible. Even with the very largest telescopes, some
distant space objects appear so faint that the only
way they become visible is through long-exposure
photography or by using CCDs. A photographic
plate at the focus of a telescope may require several hours of exposure before enough light collects to form an image for an astronomer to
study. Unfortunately, very large ground-based telescopes also detect extremely faint atmospheric
glow, which interferes with the image. Not having to look through the atmosphere to see faint
objects is one of the advantages space-based telescopes have over ground-based instruments.
Magnification – Magnification is often misunderstood as a measure of a telescope’s performance. One
would think that a telescope with a higher magnification power would perform better than a telescope
with a lower power. This is not necessarily so. A telescope with a high magnification power but a low
light gathering power will produce highly magnified
images that are too faint to see. A rule of thumb in
obtaining a telescope is that the magnification of the
telescope should be no greater than 25 times the
diameter of the large (front) lens in centimeters. For
example, a telescope with a front lens with a diameter of 5 centimeters should have a maximum magnification of no more than 125. Anything beyond
that will produce a very poor view.
M=

F0
Fe

The magnification of a telescope is calculated by
dividing the focal length of the front lens by the
focal length of the eyepiece. The focal length is
the distance from the center of the lens to the
focal point. With astronomical telescopes, the
focal lengths of the various lenses are marked on
the housing.

α=

11.6
D

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

65

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 66

Resolving Power – With telescopes as powerful
as the Hubble Space Telescope, resolving power
becomes important. Resolving power is the
ability of a telescope to separate two closely
spaced objects. For example, a bright star to the
naked eye might actually be two closely-spaced
stars in a telescope. Resolving power is measured in arc seconds. An arc second is 1:3,600th
of a degree.
Management and Tips:
In this light gathering power activity, younger
students can use larger objects such as pennies,
washers, or poker chips in place of the paper
punchouts. Discs can be eliminated entirely by
drawing the circles directly on graph paper and
counting the squares to estimate light gathering
power of different sized lenses and mirrors.
When students notice that the punchouts do not
entirely cover the circles, ask them what they
should do to compensate for the leftover space.
For the activity on magnification and resolving
power, use the small telescope constructed in the
previous activity. Because of their minimum focal
distance, astronomical telescopes will not work
for this activity. A toy spyglass and spotter scopes
should work.

Extensions:
• Compare the light gathering power of the
various lenses you collected with the human
eye. Have students measure the diameters, in
centimeters, of each lens. Hold a small plastic ruler in front of each student’s eye in the
class and derive an average pupil diameter
for all students. Be careful not to touch eyes
with the ruler. If you have an astronomical
telescope, determine its light gathering
power over the unaided human eye.
• If an astronomical telescope is available,
have students calculate the actual magnification power of the telescope with its various lenses.
• Have students calculate the focal length of the
lenses used in the light gathering power portion of this activity. The students should focus
light from overhead fixtures on the desk top
and measure how far above the desk the lens
is. This is the focal length.

Optical Path for Binoculars

Assessment:
Collect student sheets and compare answers.
Student Work Sheet Answers:
1A. The ratio of the amount of light a telescope
can gather compared to the human eye.

objective

eyepiece

1B. The ability of a telescope to make distant
objects appear larger.

prisms

1C. The ability of a telescope to distinguish
between two closely
spaced objects.

focal point

2. 100
3. 100
4. 0.058 arc seconds

66

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

objective Lens
focal length

eyepiece
focal length

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 67

Resolution Chart

1

6

2

7

3

8

4

9

5

10
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

67

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 68

Student Work Sheet

Telescope Performance
Name: _________________________
1. What do each of these terms mean?
A. Light gathering power
B. Magnification
C. Resolving power
2. A telescope has a diameter of 10 centimeters. The iris of your eye has a
diameter 1 centimeter. What is the light gathering power of the telescope
compared to your eye. Show your work below.

3. Explain how to measure the focal length of a lens.

4. A telescope has an objective (front) lens with a focal length of 1,000 mm
and an eyepiece with a focal length of 10 mm. What is the magnification
power of the telescope? Show your work below.

5. A telescope has an objective lens with a diameter of 200 centimeters.
What is the telescope’s resolving power? Show your work below.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 69

ACTIVITY: Liquid Crystal IR Detector
Description:
Students simulate the detection of infrared radiation using a liquid crystal sheet.
Objective:
To experiment with one method of detecting
infrared radiation.
National Education Standards:
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Properties & changes of properties in matter
Transfer of energy
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies
Materials:
Liquid crystal sheet (available at museums,
nature stores, and science supply catalogs)
Table top
Procedure:
1. Have a student touch his or her fingertips on
a tabletop for 30 seconds. Make sure the student has warm hands.
2. While handling the liquid crystal sheet only
by its edges, place it where the fingertips
touched the table. Observe what happens
over the next several seconds.
Background:
Infrared telescopes have a detector sensitive to
infrared light. The telescope is placed as high
up in the atmosphere as possible on a mountaintop, in an aircraft or balloon, or flown in
space because water vapor in the atmosphere
absorbs some of the infrared radiation from
space. The human eye is not sensitive to
infrared light, but our bodies are. We sense
infrared radiation as heat. Because of this association with heat, telescopes and infrared
detectors must be kept as cool as possible. Any
heat from the surroundings will create lots of
extra infrared signals that interfere with the

real signal from space. Astronomers use cryogens such as liquid nitrogen, liquid helium, or
dry ice to cool infrared instruments.
This activity uses a liquid crystal detector that
senses heat. Also known as cholesteric liquid
crystals, the liquid inside the sheet exhibits
dramatic changes in colors when exposed to
slight differences in temperature within the
range of 25 to 32 degrees Celsius. The sheet
detects the heat associated with infrared rays.
In the case of an infrared telescope in space, the
energy is detected directly by instruments sensitive to infrared radiation. Usually, the data is
recorded on computers and transmitted to Earth
as a radio signal. Ground-based computers
reassemble the image of the objects that created
the radiation.
Management and Tips:
Liquid crystal sheets come in many forms. The
best sheets for this activity are large enough to
fit an entire hand. These sheets also come as
postcards and as thermometers. You may be
able to find a forehead thermometer made of a
strip of liquid crystals.
Do not allow the sheet to come into direct contact with very hot materials as they may damage
the sheet. It is important that the student has
hands warm enough to leave a heat signature on
the tabletop. Also, it is important that the tabletop be relatively cool to start with. If the table is
already warm, the image of the fingertips will be
masked by the tabletop’s heat. This is similar to
the situation that would occur inside a spacecraft
that is not cooled. Stray infrared signals from the
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

69

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 70

spacecraft would cloud the infrared image from
distance objects.

•

Assessment:
Ask your students why it is important to keep
infrared telescopes very cool for accurate observations.
•
Extensions:
• How was infrared radiation discovered?
• Why do infrared detectors have to be kept
cold?
• Learn about cholesteric liquid crystals. An
Austrian botanist Freidrich Reinitfer discovered them in 1888.

70

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Obtain an infrared thermometer for measuring temperatures from a distance. Such thermometers are available from science supply
companies. Use the thermometer to measure
the temperature of various objects such as a
candle flame, beaker of warm water, or
ground surfaces in and out of the sunlight.
Invite a thermal scanning company to
demonstrate their equipment to your students. These companies use infrared scanners to form infrared images of homes to isolate areas of heat loss.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 71

UNIT 4
DOWN TO EARTH
Introduction
Although astronomers who work with ground-based telescopes have to deal with bad
weather and atmospheric filtering, they do have one advantage over astronomers working with instruments in space. The ground-based astronomers can work directly with
their instruments.That means that they can constantly check and adjust their instruments
first-hand. Astronomers working with satellite-based instruments must do everything
remotely. With the exception of telescopes mounted in the Space Shuttle’s payload bay,
astronomers can only interact with their instruments via radio transmissions. That means
that the instruments have to be mounted on a satellite that provides radio receivers and
transmitters, electric power, pointing control, data storage, and a variety of computer-run
subsystems.
Data collection, transmission, and analysis are of
primary importance to astronomers. The development of photomultiplier tubes and charged coupled devices (CCDs) provides astronomers with an
efficient means of collecting data in a digital form,

transmitting it via radio, and analyzing it by computer processing. CCDs, for example, convert photons falling on their light sensitive elements into
electric signals that are assigned numeric values representing their strength. Spacecraft subsystems conSpace-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

71

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 72

vert numeric values into a data stream of binary
numbers that are transmitted to Earth. Once
received, computers reconvert the data stream to
the original numbers that can be processed into
images or spectra.
If the satellite is geostationary, these data may be
transmitted continuously to ground receiving stations consisting of one or more radio antennas
and support equipment. Geostationary satellites
orbit in an easterly direction over Earth’s equator
at an elevation of approximately 40,000 kilometers. They orbit Earth in one day, the same time it
takes Earth to rotate, so the satellite remains over
the same location on Earth at all times.

spaced station points over Earth’s equator, the
TDRSS satellites serve as relay points for lower
satellites and the Space Shuttle. The system provides nearly continuous contact with spacecraft
as they orbit Earth. TDRSS satellites relay data
to a receiver at White Sands, New Mexico. From
there, the data travel via telephone lines, fiber
optic cable, or commercial communications
satellites to its destination. Most astrophysics
data travels from White Sands to the NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland for
distribution to scientists.

Unit Goal
•

Satellites at other altitudes and orbital paths do
not stay above one point on Earth. As a result,
they remain visible to a particular ground station
for a short time and then move out of range. This
requires many widely spaced ground stations to
collect the satellite’s data. In spite of this, the
satellite still spends much of its time over parts of
Earth where no stations exist (oceans, polar
regions, etc.). For this reason, one of the subsystems on astronomical satellites are tape recorders
that store data until they can transmit it to
ground stations.
In the mid-1980’s, NASA began deploying the
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System
(TDRSS) into geostationary orbit. The purpose
of this system is to relay data to ground stations.
Because of their high orbits and their widely

72

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

To demonstrate how astronomical satellites
use technology to collect optical data, transmit that data to Earth, and reassemble it into
images.

Approach
The activities in this unit demonstrate the imaging process of astronomical satellites such as the
Hubble Space Telescope. Use the Magic Wand
and Persistence of Vision activities together or as
alternates. The Magic Wand activity shows how
images can be divided and reassembled. The
Color activity shows how astronomy satellites
collect color data and how that data can be
reassembled on the ground. The Binary Number
and Paint by the Numbers activities familiarize
students with the process of data transmission to
Earth and its re-assembly into images.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 73

ACTIVITY: Magic Wand
Description:
A recognizable image from a slide projector
appears while a white rod moves rapidly across
the projector’s beam.
Objective:
To demonstrate how an image falling on a CCD
array is divided into individual pieces.
National Education Standards:
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Motions & forces
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies
Materials:
Slide projector
Color slide of clearly defined object such as
Saturn, a building, etc.
1/2-inch dowel, 3 feet long
Sheet of white paper
White paint (flat finish)
Dark room
Procedure:
1. Paint the dowel white and permit it to dry.
(A piece of 3/4-inch PVC water pipe from a
hardware store can substitute for the dowel
and white paint, and so can a painted meter
stick.)
2. Set up the slide projector in the back of
the classroom and focus the image of the
slide at a distance of about 4 meters away
from the projector. Hold the sheet of
paper in the beam at the proper distance
for easy focusing. Be sure the focus point
you select is in the middle of the room and
not near a wall.
3. Arrange the students between the focus
point and the projector. Darken the room.
Hold the dowel in one hand and slowly
move it up and down through the projector
beam at the focal point. Ask the students to

try to identify the image that appears on the
dowel.
4. Gradually, increase the speed of the dowel’s
movement.
5. When the dowel moves very fast, the image
becomes clear.
Background:
Because astronomy spacecraft operate in space
for many years, the data they collect cannot be
recorded on camera film. There is simply no
easy way to deliver the film to Earth for processing and to resupply the spacecraft with fresh
film. Rather, the satellite instruments collect
light from objects and divide it into discrete bits
of information and radio them to Earth as a
series of binary numbers. This activity demonstrates how images can be divided into many
parts and then reassembled into a recognizable
picture. By slowly moving the dowel across the
slide projector’s beam, small fragments of the
image are captured and reflected (“radioed”)
towards the students. Because more and more
fragments are sent as the dowel is moved, the
image quickly becomes confused in the student’s
minds. However, as the rod is moved more rapLook through this end

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

73

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 74

Cut out slot

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

idly, an important property of the eye and brain
connection comes into play; light images are
momentarily retained. This property is called
persistence of vision. As the dowel’s movement
increases, single lines of the image remain just
long enough to combine with the others to form
a recognizable image. In this manner, the rapidly moving rod simulates the CCD and the
eye/brain interaction simulates the final imaging
computer that receives the radioed data and
reassembles it for use.
Management and Tips:
By setting up the projector so that its projected
image is focused in the middle of the room, the
light from the image that falls on the far wall will
be out of focus. This will make it more difficult
for students to recognize the image until the
dowel is passed through the light beam. Be sure
to point out that the rod sends (“radios”) a fragment of the entire image. When the rod is
moved, another image fragment is received.
Challenge your students to memorize each fragment as they receive it. The fragments will be
quickly forgotten as new fragments are added. It
is only when the rod is moved very fast that they
will be able to recognize the image. However, if
the fragments were received by a computer in a
digital form, each fragment would be recorded
and an image would be built up at any speed.
Relate this activity to the Paint by the Numbers
activity on pages 00-00.

74

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Assessment:
Ask students to explain the imaging process as it
is demonstrated here and use examples of images
in other applications where the images consist of
small parts that combine to make a whole.
Extensions:
• How do television studios create and transmit pictures to home receivers?
• How does a CCD work?
• Project some slides. Magnify them as much as
possible on a projection screen to see how the
complete image consists of many discrete parts.
• Construct a persistence of vision tube.
Close off the end of a cardboard tube
except for a narrow slit. While looking
through the open end of the tube, wave the
tube back and forth. A recognizable image
will form at the other end of the tube. Use
the tube to examine fluorescent lights.
Why do slightly darker bands appear
across the lights? Hint: Fluorescent lights
do not remain on continuously. The light
turns on and off with the cycling of AC
current. Will using the tube to view an
incandescent light have the same effect?
Use the tube to examine the picture on a
television screen. Why is the TV picture
reduced to lines? Hint: Television pictures
consist of scan lines.
• A simpler version of the persistence of vision
tube can be made with a 10 by 10-centimeter square of black construction paper. Fold
the paper in half. Using scissors, cut a narrow slit from the middle of the fold. Open
the square up and quickly pass the slit across
one eye while looking at some distant
objects.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 75

ACTIVITY: Colors
Description:
Students identify the actual colors of objects
bathed in monochromatic light and learn how
three colors of light can be combined to produce
colors ranging from black to white.
Objectives:
• To identify the actual colors of objects
bathed in monochromatic light.
• To demonstrate how three colored lights can
be combined to produce a wide range of
secondary colors.
• To show how space observatories make use
of monochromatic filters to collect data on
the color of objects in space.
National Education Standards:
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Change, constancy, & measurement
Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
Properties & changes of properties in matter
Transfer of energy
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand troubleshooting, R & D, invention, innovation, & experimentation
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies
Materials:
Indoor/outdoor floodlights (red, green, and
blue)
Adjustable fixtures to hold the lights
Projection screen
Various colored objects (apple, banana,
grapes, print fabrics, etc.)
Dark room
Procedure Part 1 - Color Recognition:
1. Prior to class, set up the three floodlights in a
row at a distance of about 4 meters from the
projection screen so that they each point to the
center of the screen. The lights should be
spaced about 1 meter apart. When properly
aimed, the three lights should blend to produce

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

a nearly white light falling on the screen. Move
one or more lights closer to or farther away
from the screen to achieve a proper balance.
Darken the classroom and turn on the red
lamp.
Hold up the colored objects one at a time. Ask
students to make notes on the Color Table as
to how bright or dark the objects appear in the
red light.
Turn off the red light and turn on the green
light and repeat with the same objects.
Repeat again, but this time use the blue light.
Turn on the room lights and show the students the actual colors of the objects.
Challenge the students to identify the colors of
new objects. Show them the unknown objects
in the red, green, and then blue lights. By using
their notes, the students should be able to
determine the actual colors of the objects.
Hold up a Granny Smith or Golden Delicious
apple to see if the students can correctly judge
its actual color or will instead jump to an erroneous conclusion based on shape.

Procedure Part 2 - Color Shadows:
1. Using the same light and screen setup, darken
the room and turn all the floodlights on, hold
up your hand between the lights and the
screen. Three colored shadows appear––yellow,
cyan, and magenta.
3. Move your hand closer to the screen. The
shadows will overlap and produce additional
colors––red, blue, and green. When all the
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

75

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 76

Part 1 of this activity demonstrates the data collection part of the color imaging process. By
examining various objects in red, green, and then
blue light, the students note that the brightness
varies with the illuminating. Using colored lights
is equivalent to observing the objects through
colored filters. The way each object appears
relates to its “real” colors as seen in normal light.
By noting subtle differences in brightness in each
of the three colored lights, the actual colors of
the objects can be identified.

shadows overlap, there is no color (light) left
and the shadow on the screen becomes black.
4. Invite your students to try their “hand” at
making shadows.
Background:
Astronomical spacecraft, working in the visible
region of the electromagnetic spectrum, collect
images of stars and galaxies in various colors.
Color filters rotate into the light path so that the
detector sees one color at a time. The image in
each of these colors is transmitted to Earth as a
series of binary numbers. Image processing computers on Earth take each of the images, color
them, and combine all the images to reconstruct
a multi-colored image representing the true colors of the object. To enhance details in the
images, astronomers will use artificial colors or
boost the color in one or more wavelengths.

ADDITIVE COLORS

RED

YELLOW

MAGENTA

WHITE

GREEN

76

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

CYAN

BLUE

Part 2 of this activity demonstrates how a few basic
colors can produce a wide range of colors and hues.
When the three lamps are set up properly, the
screen appears whitish. When all shadows overlap,
they become black; black is the absence of light. In
between white and black are red, green, blue, cyan,
yellow, and magenta. By moving the floodlights
forward and back, a wide range of hues appears.
Management and Tips:
It is difficult to get a pure white screen with
indoor/outdoor floodlights. The colors produced
by them are not entirely monochromatic. Using
much more expensive lamps produces a better
white but the whiteness is not significantly
enhanced. An alternative to the colored lamps is to
obtain red, green, and blue theatrical gels (filters)
and place them (one each) on the stage of three
overhead projectors. Aiming each of the three projectors to the same place on the screen produces the
same effect as the lamps, but the colors are more
uniform across the screen and the white is purer.
Assessment:
Collect the color tables of the students. Hold up
colored objects in different monochromatic
lights and have the students try to identify their
white light colors.
Extensions:
• Look at color magazine pictures. How many
colors do you see? Examine the pictures with
a magnifying glass. How many colors do you
see? Also examine the picture on a color television screen.
• What common devices use red, green, and
blue to produce colored pictures?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 77

Color Filter Wheel

Cut
Out
Back Plate

1

Cut
Out

Cut
Out

Cut
Out
Front Plate

2

3
Back Plate
Cut
Out
Front Plate

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

77

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 78

Color Image Process
Red

Green

Blue

Composite Image

StSci-PR99-02
Ring Nebula
(M57)

This simulation of the imaging process of the Hubble Space Telescope
required three separate images, each taken through a different filter.
The M57 Ring Nebula looks very different in each of the exposures.
To create the color composite image, each image is colored in red,
green, or blue and combined.

•
•

•

78

Is there any difference in the results of mixing colored lights and colored paints?
Punch a 2-centimeter hole in an opaque
piece of paper. Adjusting the distance of the
paper to the screen may help students investigate the color additive process.
This activity also works using colored acetate
filters taped over small windows cut into file
cards. Sheets of red, green, and blue acetate
can be purchased at art supply stores.
Students can make their own filter cards and
take them home to look through the windows at a variety of objects. Better quality
filters, that transmit “purer” colors, can be

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

•

obtained from theatrical supply stores at a
cost comparable to acetate filters. If your
school has a theater department, you may be
able to obtain filters (gels) from them.
The following reference describes further
activities with the filters:
Sneider, C., Gould, A., & Hawthorne, C.,
“Color Analyzers Teacher’s Guide,” Great
Explorations in Math and Science (GEMS),
Lawrence Hall of Science, University of
California at Berkeley, 1991. (Available from
the museum or the National Science
Teacher’s Association.)

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 79

Color Table

Student Work Sheet

Name

Known Colors
Object

Green

Red

Blue

True
Color

Unknown Colors
Object
1
2
3
4
5

Red

Green

Blue

True
Color

?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 80

ACTIVITY: Binary Numbers
Description:
Two flashlights are used to demonstrate how
astronomy spacecraft transmit images and other
scientific data to Earth.
Objective:
To use the binary number system to transmit
messages.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Number & operation
Patterns, function, & algebra
Measurement
Data analysis, statistics, & probability
Communication
Connections
Representations
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Change, constancy, & measurement
Understandings about science & technology
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand cultural, social, economic, &
political effects of technology
Understand, select, & use:
Medical technologies
Agricultural technologies & biotechnologies
Energy & power technologies
Information & communication technologies
Transportation technologies
Manufacturing technologies
Construction technologies
Materials:
Two flashlights with pushbutton switches
Binary code and data sheets
Procedure:
1. Explain how astronomical spacecraft use the
binary system to transmit, via radio waves,
images and other scientific data from spacecraft to Earth. Refer to the background section for details on how the system works.
2. Distribute the data sheet and substitution
code page to every student. Tap out a six

80

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

number sequence of the push buttons on the
two flashlights. Your right hand flashlight
will represent a 1 and your left hand flashlight will represent a 0. As the lights flash,
each student should check off the appropriate box in the practice column. To make
sense later, the students must check off the
boxes representing right or left flashes in the
exact sequence of the flashing lights. Refer to
the sample on the next page to see how to
make the checks.
3. For the practice columns, total up the numbers each sequential flash represents. For
example, if all flashes are with the left flashlight, the value is 0+0+0+0+0+0 = 0. If six
flashes are all with the right flashlight, the
value of the binary number is 63. The first
right flash represents a 1, the second is 2, the
third is 4, the fourth is 8, the fifth is 16, and
the sixth is 32 (1+2+4+8+16+32=63). The
following sequence of flashes is 37: Right,
Left, Right, Left, Left, Right. After the boxes
are filled in, the students total the numbers
in the two columns. The answer will give
students the total value of the number that
was transmitted. (In this activity, the number will represent a letter in a message. With
the Hubble Space Telescope, the number
will represent the brightness of a particular
point on an image.)
4. After the students become familiar with the
method, transmit a message to the them.
Create the message by referring to the substitution code in the following pages. Replace
each word in your message with the corresponding code number. For example,
“Hello!” would convert to 7, 4, 11, 11, 24,
38. Next, convert each code number into a
binary number. Seven, for example, becomes
Right, Right, Right, Left, Left, Left and 24
becomes Left, Left, Left, Right, Right, Left.
As you will note in the substitution code, only
the first 40 of the 64 possible numbers are
used. The remaining numbers can be assigned
to common words of your choosing such as
“the” and “but,” and to short sentences such
as “How are you?” Transmit the message by
flashing the lights in the proper sequence.
Every six flashes represents a binary number

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 81

that can be converted into a letter or word
through the code. Students receive the message by checking the flashes on the data sheet,
determining the binary numbers they represent, and then changing the numbers into letters or words.
5. Discuss how a picture could be translated
through binary code. (Refer to the activity
Paint by the Numbers.)
Background:
Because astronomical spacecraft operate in orbit
around Earth, the images they collect of objects in
space have to be transmitted to the ground by
radio signals. To make this possible, the light from
these objects is concentrated on a light sensitive
charged coupled device (CCD). The Hubble
Space Telescope uses four CCDs arranged in a
square. The surface of each CCD is a grid consisting of 800 vertical and 800 horizontal lines that
create a total of 640,000 light sensitive squares
called pixels for picture elements. With four
CCDs, the total number of pixels in the Hubble
Space Telescope CCD array is 2,560,000.
Photons of light fall on the CCD array and are
converted into digital computer data. A numerical value is assigned to the number of photons
received on each of the more than two million
pixels. This number represents the brightness of
the light falling on each pixel. The numbers range
from 0 to 255. This range yields 256 shades of
gray ranging from black (0) to white (255).
These numbers are translated into a binary computer code on board the spacecraft. A binary
number is a simple numeric code consisting of a
specific sequence of on and off radio signals.
They are the same codes that are used in computers. A binary number radio transmission can
be compared to a flashing light. When the light
is on, the value of the signal is a specific number.
When the light is off, the value is 0. (In this
activity the right flashlight is the 1 and the left
flashlight is the 0. Although the activity could be
done with 1 flashlight, it would be difficult for
students to determine how may 0’s are being
transmitted when the light is off. Computers
precisely time the interval to determine how

many 0’s are in the sequence. Using a second
flashlight for 0’s makes it easy for students to
determine the number of 0’s.)
A binary number usually consists of 8 bits (1
byte). The first bit in the sequence represents a 1.
The second bit represents a 2. The remaining 6
bits represent 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 respectively. If all bits are “on” the value of the binary
number is the sum of each bit value—255. If all
bits are “off,” the value is 0. A sequence of on, off,
on, on, off, off, on, and off represents the numbers
1+0+4+8+0+64+0, or 77. To save classroom time,
the binary system has been simplified in this activity by using a 6-bit binary code. The total value of
a 6-bit code is 64, or 1+2+4+8+16+32.
After the image of the space object is encoded, the
binary bits are transmitted by radio waves to a
receiving station on the ground. The photons of
light that fall on each of the 2,560,000 pixels are
now represented by a data set consisting of
20,480,000 binary bits. The computer will convert
them to a black and white image of the space
object. If a colored image is desired, at least two
more images are collected, each one taken through
a different colored filter. The data from the three
images are combined by a computer into a composite image that shows the actual colors of the
object being observed.
Because images collected by the HST and other
astronomy spacecraft are digital, astronomers can
use computers to manipulate images. This
manipulation is roughly analogous to the manipulation of color, brightness, and contrast controls
on a television set. The manipulation process is
called enhancement and it provides astronomers
with a powerful tool for analyzing the light from
space objects.
To learn more about the imaging process, refer to
the following activities in this guide: Paint by the
Numbers and Colors.
Management and Tips:
Students may be confused by right and left flashlights when you face them. The right (1) and left
(0) flashlights refer to the student’s right and left.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

81

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 82

Look at the columns of marks for each letter you
transmit. If the mark is in the right-hand box
and represents an on (1) signal, flash the right
flashlight. Students will read this as a 0. If the
mark is in the left-hand box and represents an off
(0) signal, flash your left flashlight. Students will
read this as a 1.
Students will sometimes lose track of the light
sequence by concentrating on their paper. If you
can dim the room lights a bit, which flashlight
beam is turned on is easier to see out of the corner
of the eye. Also, you can use the light fixtures used
in the color activity for the code. Use the green
lamp on for a 1 and the red lamp on for a 0.
Students may also become confused by using one
number to represent another number. Make sure
they understand the sequence of 1’s and 0’s is the
code. The on-off (1-0) code is what is used in the
process. However, other things could be used for
the 1-0 such as the words “on-off ” or even words
like “pickle-pineapple.” It is the sequence of the
words or numbers used that is important.
If you have visually impaired students, you can
substitute tapping two different surfaces to make
two different sounds for them to listen to and
interpret as 1’s or 0’s.

•

If you wish to use materials other than flashlights
for transmitting data, you can make two cards
with a large 1 on one card and a 0 on the other.
Raise and lower the cards in sequence to represent a binary number.
Assessment:
Check the student sheets to see if they have correctly received the message.
Extensions:
• Have students code binary numbers with a
binary coder consisting of several paper
desert plates or shallow cups and markers

82

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

•

•
•

such as jelly beans or breakfast cereal pieces.
Arrange the plates in a row and number the
first one “1”. Mark the plate to the left “2”
and the plate to the left of that one “4”, etc.
Place a small group of markers in the 1
plate. To code the markers into binary
numbers, follow these rules: If a plate has
two or more markers, remove two markers.
Place one of the markers in a discard pile
and place the other one in the plate immediately to the left. Continue removing
markers from the 1 plate until there is only
1 or 0 left. If plate 2 has 2 or more markers,
remove two. Discard one and place the
other one in the plate to the left. Continue
until all plates have only 1 or 0 markers in
them. Starting on the left, write the binary
number. Put down a 0 for a plate with no
markers in it and a 1 for a plate with a
marker in it. To check your work, add up
the numbers on all the plates with markers.
It should be the same as the number of
markers you started with.
Transmit binary numbers by having four
students stand in a row in front of the class.
Give each student a card with a 1 on one
side and a 0 on the other. Quietly tell the
students to transmit the number 7 to their
classmates. The four students will have to
determine between them who holds up a 0
and who holds up a 1. The binary sequence
for 7 is 0111. The remainder of the students
should try to decode the binary number.
With more students in the row, higher numbers can be transmitted.
Have students transmit other scientific data
with binary numbers. For example, students
can measure the temperature of a liquid or
the mass of an object and transmit the
results to another student.
How are binary numbers used in computers?
How high can you count with a binary
number consisting of 10 bits? 12?

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 83

Data Sheet

Student Work Sheet - 1

Name:
Sample
32

16

8

4

Practice

Practice
2

32

1

0 1 0 1 1 0

=

22

16

8

4

2

32

1

0 0 1 1 0 1

8

4

2

1

1 1 0 1 1 0

=

Total

(16 + 4 + 2 = 22)

16

=
Total

Total

(Practice answers at bottom of page)

Start
8

4

2

32

1

16

8

4

2

32

1

=
Total
32

16

8

4

2

32

1

16

8

4

2

8

4

2

8

4

2

32

1

16

8

4

2

8

4

2

8

4

2

32

1

16

8

4

2

8

4

2

8

4

2

32

1

16

8

4

2

8

4

2

4

2

4

2

1

16

8

4

2

1
=

Total
32

1

16

8

4

2

Total
32

1

16

8

4

2

1

=

=
Total

32

1

16

8

4

2

Total
32

1

16

8

4

2

1

=

=
Total

32

1

16

8

4

2

Total
32

1

16

8

4

2

1

=

=
Total

32

1

16

8

4

2

Total
32

1

16

8

4

2

1

=

1
=
Total

=
Total

Go to top

8

8

Total
32

Total
16

16

=

=

32

1

=

1

Total
16

2

Total

=

32

4

Total
32

Total
16

8

=

=

32

16

=

1

Total
16

1

Total

=

32

2

Total
32

Total
16

4

=

=

32

8

=

1

Total
16

16

Total

=

32

1

Total
32

Total
16

2

=

=

32

4

=

1

Total
16

8

Total

=

32

16

=

32

16

8

4

2

1
=
Total

Go to top

16

Practice Answers: 13 and 54

Work down

32

Total
32

16

8

4

2

1
=

Finish

Total

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 84

ACTIVITY: Paint by the Numbers
Description:
A pencil and paper activity demonstrates how
astronomical spacecraft and computers create
images of objects in space.
Objective:
To simulate how light collected from a space
object converts into binary data and reconverts
into an image of the object.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Number & operation
Patterns, function, & algebra
Measurement
Data analysis, statistics, & probability
Communication
Connections
Representations
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Change, constancy, & measurement
Earth in the solar system
Abilities of technological design
Technology
Understand cultural, social, economic, &
political effects of technology
Ability to use & maintain technological
products & systems
Understand, select, & use:
Medical technologies
Agricultural technologies & biotechnologies
Energy & power technologies
Information & communication technologies
Transportation technologies
Manufacturing technologies
Construction technologies
Materials: (per group of two students)
Transparent grid
Paper grid
Picture of house
Pencil

84

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Procedure:
1. Divide students into pairs.
2. Give one student (A) in each pair the paper
copy of the blank grid on the next page. Give
the other student (B) in each pair the picture
of the house on the next page. Instruct student B not to reveal the picture to student A.
Also give student B a copy of the transparent
grid. (See notes about making student copies
of the picture and grids on the next page.)
3. Explain that the picture is an object being
observed at a great distance. It will be scanned
by an optical device like those found on some
astronomical satellites and an image will be
created on the paper.
4. Have student B place the grid over the picture.
Student B should look at the brightness of
each square defined by the grid lines and
assign it a number according to the chart
above the picture. Student B will then call out
the number to student A. If a particular square
covers an area of the picture that is both light
and dark, student B should estimate its average brightness and assign an intermediate
value to the square such as a 1 or a 2. Note:
The letters and numbers on two sides of the
grid can assist the receiving student in finding
the location of each square to be shaded.
5. After receiving a number from student B, student A will shade the corresponding square
on the grid. If the number is 0, the square
should be shaded black. If it is 3, the square
should be left as it is.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 85

0

1

2

3

Shading Values

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Sample Picture

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
100 Pixel Grid

6. Compare the original picture with the image
sketched on the paper.

to do so, you can select a single student to represent the spacecraft and transmit the data to the
rest of the class.

Background:
This activity simulates the process by which an
astronomy spacecraft such as the Hubble Space
Telescope collects light from an astronomical
object and converts the light into a digital form
that can be displayed on Earth as an image of the
object. The student with the transparent grid represents the spacecraft. The picture is the object the
spacecraft is trying to collect from. The student
with the paper grid represents the radio receiver on
the ground and the image-processing computer
that will assemble the image of the object.

With the HST, the grid consists of more than 2.5
million pixels and they are shaded in 256 steps
from black to white instead of just the 4 shades
used here. Color images of an object are created
by the HST with color filters. The spacecraft
observes the object through a red filter, a blue filter, and then a green one. Each filter creates a
separate image, containing different information. These images are then colored and combined in a process similar to color separations
used for printing colored magazine pictures.

The image created with this activity is a crude
representation of the original picture. The reason
for this is that the initial grid contains only 64
squares (8 x 8). If there were many more squares,
each square would be smaller and the image
would show finer detail. You may wish to repeat
this activity with a grid consisting of 256 squares
(16 x 16). However, increasing the number of
squares will require more class time. If you wish

Management and Tips:
Students can provide their own pictures for this
activity. It is important for the pictures to show
strong contrast. The smaller the grid squares, the
more detail that will appear in the image.
However, simply going from a grid of 10 x 10 to
a grid of 20 x 20 will quadruple the length of
time it takes to complete the image. Refer to the
Color Recognition and Colored Shadows activiSpace-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

85

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 86

ties for more details on how color filters work
and how to combine colors.
Assessment:
Collect the pictures of the house drawn by the
student receivers. Compare the original drawing
with the student images. Discuss with your students possible strategies for improving the detail
of the images.
Extensions:
• Transmit and reconstruct the image of
Saturn shown on the next page. This more
advanced picture uses six shades and smaller
grid squares.
• Examine printed copies of drawings made
with a computer art program. Notice how
the pictures are constructed of individual
points. Also notice how the size of the points
contributes to the fineness of detail in the
picture.
• Examine pictures drawn on a computer. Use
the magnifying tool to move to the maximum magnification possible. Compare the
two views.
• Obtain Hubble Space Telescope images
from the Internet sites given in Unit 5.
Examine them closely for the pixel structure.
Alternately enlarge and reduce the image size
on your computer screen to see the effect on
the fineness of detail.

100 Pixel Grid Over House

100 Pixel Grid

400 Pixel Grid
86

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

1,600 Pixel Grid

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

0

2/28/01

8:54 AM

1

2

Page 87

3

4

5

6

7

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

87

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 89

UNIT 5
SPACE-BASED ASTRONOMY
ON THE INTERNET
Introduction
Activities in the previous units centered on the problems caused by Earth’s atmosphere, the nature and uses of the electromagnetic spectrum, visible and infrared
radiation collectors, and the imaging process. Once students gain a basic understanding of the nature and methods of space-based astronomy, the only thing left
is to do space-based astronomy. This requires obtaining images to study.
Fortunately, obtaining images is very easy to do
through the many astronomy Web sites available
on the Internet. The list below provides several
excellent resources. It must be remembered,
however that Web site addresses sometimes
change but old addresses will have a forwarding
message leading the user to the new site.
Furthermore, most sites link to other sites and
the actual resources available on-line are much
greater than shown here.

NASA maintains extensive Web sites related to
astronomy. On the Office of Space Science site
there are links to many astronomy spacecraft
Web sites. Missions that have flown or are currently operating, such as the SOHO, Voyager, or
Galileo missions will have many images to
retrieve.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

89

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 90

Unit Goal:
Students will use data found on Internet Web
sites to investigate astronomical objects.
National Education Standards:
Mathematics
Connections
Science
Evidence, models, & explanation
Structure of the Earth system
Earth is the solar system
Technology
Understand relationships & connections
among technologies & other fields
Understand cultural, social, economic, &
political effects of technology
Understand, select, & use information &
communication technologies

90

the Macintosh), Scion Image (for Windowsbased computers), and various commercial image
manipulation programs. These programs permit
students to change the colors of selected parts of
the image in order to enhance the contrast and
reveal structures that might not be visible to the
unaided eye. Measurement tools can be used to
determine the size of objects if the distance to
them is known, measure the relative brightness of
stars, map distributions of objects, and so on.

Teaching Strategy:
Using the Internet, students may retrieve Hubble
Space Telescope and Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory images as well as pictures from many
other satellite observatories. The objects in the
images can be examined by unaided visual
inspection and compared to pictures taken of the
same objects by ground-based observatories.
However, the advantage of using computers to
retrieve the images is that the same computers
can be used to analyze the image with image processing programs. The images can be opened in
public domain programs such as NIH Image (for

StSci-PR98-39: Planetary Nebula NGC 3132

StSci-PR99-02: Combined Deep View of Infrared and Visible
Light Galaxies

CGRO-Supernova: Supernova detected by the Compton
Gamma Ray Observatory

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 91

In addition to the analysis of images, students
also have access to telescopes that can be controlled remotely. Furthermore, many sites provide background information on a wide range
of astronomical topics for research reports.
Descriptions of proposed new spacecraft are
also available as well as the research questions
astronomers are trying to answer with them.
From the NASA Office of Space Science Web
site comes the following list of fundamental
questions they are trying to answer with their
astronomy spacecraft. Some of these questions
may inspire students into particular lines of
research.
Fundamental Questions:

1. How did the Universe begin and what is its
ultimate fate?
2. How do galaxies, stars, and planetary systems form and evolve?
3. What physical processes take place in
extreme environments such as black holes?
4. How and where did life begin?
5. How is the evolution of life linked to planetary evolution and to cosmic phenomena?
6. How and why does the Sun vary and how do
the Earth and other planets respond?
7. How might humans inhabit other worlds?

STSci-PRC97-33: One of the brightest stars in the Milky Way
Galaxy glows with the radiance of 10 million Suns.

SN 19941: Supernova in galaxy M51

BRB 971214: Hubble Space Telescope view of the site of a
gamma ray burst detected by the Keck 10-meter telescope

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

91

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 92

Deep Space Astronomy Web sites
NASA Resources
NASA Office of Space Science
http://spacescience.nasa.gov
http://spacescience.nasa.gov/missions/index.html
Planetary Photojournal
http://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov
Images From High-Energy Astrophysics missions
http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/Images/pretty_pictures.html
Imagine the Universe
http://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/homepage.html
StarChild Learning Center for Young
Astronomers
http://starchild.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/StarChild/StarChild.
html
Astronomy & Astrophysics at the National Space
Science Data Center
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/astro
Telescopes in Education
http://learn.ivv.nasa.gov/products/k12/jpl_tie.html
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
http://cossc.gsfc.nasa.gov/cossc/PR.html

92

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Non-NASA Resources
AstroWeb
http://www.stsci.edu/astroweb/astronomy.html
Chandra Xray Observatory Center
http://xrtpub.harvard.edu
Space Telescope Science Institute
http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo
Amazing Space Web-Based Activities
http://amazing-space.stsci.edu
National Astronomy Education Projects
http://www.aspsky.org/html/naep/naep.html
Stardate
http://www.visionx.com/dd/main/star.htm
Hubble Space Telescope Information
http://www.ncc.com/misc/hubble_sites.html
SEDS Messier Catalog
http://www.seds.org/messier
Astronomy Sites
http://www.inlink.com/~tfc/stars.html
NIH Image and Scion Image
http://cipe.com/Software/Soft.html

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 93

GLOSSARY
Absorption lines - Dark lines that are produced
in a spectrum because intervening atoms
absorbed photons of specific wavelengths.
Angstrom - A unit of wavelength measure equivalent to 10-12 meters.
Astronomy - The branch of science focusing on
celestial objects, dealing with their size, location,
composition, dynamics, origin, etc.

Concave lens or mirror - A lens or mirror that
presents an inward curvature to the objective.
Continuous spectrum - A spectrum unbroken by
absorption or emission lines.
Convex lens or mirror - A lens with an outward
curvature.
Diffraction - The spreading out of light waves as
they pass by the edge of a body or through closely spaced parallel scratches in a diffraction grating.

Astrophysics - Investigation, through remote
sensing, of the physical principles of astronomical objects.

Dispersion - Breaking up of light into its component colors.

Binary numbers - A system of numbers that has
two as its base and can be used for numerical coding of data.

Doppler shift (effect) - Changes in the wavelengths of sound or light as the distance between
the emitter and the receiver changes.

Black hole - Any object (usually a collapsed star)
whose surface gravity is so great that neither matter nor light can escape from it.

Earth-based telescope - Telescope mounted on
the surface of Earth.

Charged coupled device (CCD) - An electronic
device that consists of a regular array of light sensitive elements that emit electrons when exposed
to light. CCDs are used as the light-detecting
element in telescopes, television cameras, etc.

Electromagnetic spectrum - The complete range
of all wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation.
Enhancement (computer) - Boosting the color or
contrast of a faint image through computer processing.
Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

93

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 94

Excitation - The state that occurs when electrons
are raised by an external input, such as light or an
electronic current, to higher energy levels.
Fluorescence - A spontaneous emission of a photon of light that occurs when an electron drops
down from a higher energy level (See excitation)
to its original level in an atom.
Frequency - The number of waves that pass a
point in one second. Frequency is usually
expressed in units of Hertz (waves or cycles per
second).
Gamma rays - Electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths shorter than 10-12 meters.
Geostationary satellite - A satellite placed in an
orbit 35,900 kilometers over Earth’s equator that
remains in the same place relative to Earth.
Infrared - Electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths ranging from approximately 10-4 to 10-6
meters.
Light gathering power (LGP) - The ability of an
optical instrument to collect light.
Long wave UV - Ultraviolet light with wavelengths (about 10-7 meters) just shorter than the
optical range of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Microwaves - Electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths ranging around 10-3 meters.
Nanometer - One billionth of a meter (10-9 m).
Neutron star - A star, about 10 kilometers in
diameter, composed of neutrons.
Objective lens or mirror - The large lens or mirror of a telescope. Sometimes referred to as the
primary lens or mirror.
Ozone layer - A region in Earth’s upper atmosphere (between 15 and 30 kilometers) where
small concentrations of ozone absorb ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun and other celestial bodies.

94

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

Persistence of vision - Momentary visual retention of signal in the visual cortex of the brain.
Photometry - Measurement of the intensity of
light.
Photon - A quantum or individual packet of
electromagnetic energy.
Photosphere - The visible surface of the Sun.
Pixels - The smallest element of a picture.
Planck’s Constant - A universal constant (h) which
gives the ratio of a quantum of radiant energy (E)
to the frequency (v) of its source. It is expressed by
the equation E=hv and its approximate numerical
value is 6.626 x 10-34 joule second.
Pulsars - A stellar radio source that emits radio
waves in a pulsating rhythm.
Radio waves - Electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths ranging from approximately 10-4 to
10-2 meters.
Refraction - Bending of light rays as they pass
through the interface between two transparent
media.
Resolution - The degree to which fine details in
an image can be seen as separated or resolved.
Resonance - Sympathetic vibration of one body
when exposed to vibrations or electromagnetic
radiation emanating from another.
Scientific Notation - Scientific notation, or powers of 10, which can simplify writing large numbers. Numbers with positive powers mean the
decimal point moves to the right (e.g., 3 x 106 =
3,000,000). A number with a negative power
means that the decimal moves to the left (e.g., 3
x 10-6 = 0.000,006).
Short wave UV - Ultraviolet light with wavelengths nearest the x-ray range (around 10-8
meters) of the electromagnetic spectrum.

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 95

Space-based astronomy - Astronomical investigations conducted from above Earth’s atmosphere.
Spectrograph - An instrument used for dispersing and recording specific wavelengths of the
electromagnetic spectrum.

Ultraviolet (UV) - Electromagnetic radiation
with wavelengths ranging from approximately
10-7 to 10-8 meters.
Visible light - Electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths ranging from approximately 400 to
700 nanometers.

Spectroscopy - The study of spectra.
Speed of light - The speed at which light travels—300,000 kilometers per second.
Supernova - A stellar explosion which increases
the brightness of a star by a factor of several million in a matter of days.

Wavelength - The distance between one wave
crest to the next wave crest (or one trough to the
next trough).
White dwarf - A small star that is actively fusing
helium into carbon and oxygen.
X-rays - Electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths ranging from approximately 10-8 to 10-11
meters.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

95

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 96

SUGGESTED READING
These books can be used by students and teachers to learn more about space-based
astronomy.
Bonnet, R. & Keen, G. (1992), Space &
Astronomy, 49 Science Fair Projects, TAB Books,
Blue Ridge Summit, PA.

Schaff, F. (1990), Seeing the Sky; 100 Projects,
Activities & Explorations in Astronomy, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY.

Clarke, D. (1998), Shoebox Spectroscopy, The
Science Teacher, v65n7, pp. 28-31.

Smith, P. (1992), Project Earth Science: Astronomy,
National Science Teacher’s Association, Arlington, VA.

Moeschl, R. (1989), Exploring the Sky; 100
Projects for Beginning Astronomers, Chicago
Review Press, Chicago, IL.

Sneider, C., et al. (1989), Color Analyzers,
Lawrence Hall of Science, Berkeley, CA.

Pethoud, R. (1993), Pi in the Sky: Hands-on
Mathematical Activities for Teaching Astronomy,
Zephyr Press, Tucson, AZ.
Porcellino, M. (1991), Young Astronomer’s Guide
to the Night Sky, TAB Books, Blue Ridge
Summit, PA.

96

Sneider, C., Gould, A. (1988), More than
Magnifiers, Lawrence Hall of Science, Berkeley, CA.
Sneider, C. (1988), Earth, Moon, and Stars,
Lawrence Hall of Science, Berkeley, CA.
Van Cleave, J. (1991), Astronomy for Every Kid:
101 Easy Experiments that Really Work, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY.

Schaff, F. (1992), Seeing the Deep Sky; Telescopic
Astronomy Projects Beyond the Solar System, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY.

Vogt, G. (1992), The Hubble Space Telescope, The
Millbrook Press, Brookfield, CT.

Schaff, F. (1991), Seeing the Solar System; Telescopic
Projects, Activities, & Explorations in Astronomy,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY.

Wood, R. (1991), Science for Kids: 39 Easy
Astronomy Experiments, TAB Books, Blue Ridge
Summit, PA.

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 97

NASA RESOURCES
FOR EDUCATORS
NASA’s Central Operation of Resources for Educators (CORE) was established for the
national and international distribution of NASA-produced educational materials in
audiovisual format. Educators can obtain a catalogue and an order form by one of
the following methods:
•

•
•
•
•

NASA CORE
Lorain County Joint Vocational School
15181 State Route 58
Oberlin, OH 44074-9799
Toll Free Ordering Line: 1-866-776-CORE
Toll Free FAX Line: 1-866-775-1401
E-mail: nasaco@leeca.org
Home Page: http://education.nasa.gov/core

Educator Resource Center Network (ERCN)
To make additional information available to the
education community, NASA has created the
NASA Educator Resource Center (ERC) network. Educators may preview, copy, or receive
NASA materials at these sites. Phone calls are
welcome if you are unable to visit the ERC that
serves your geographic area. A list of the centers
and the regions they serve includes:

AK, HI, ID, MT, NV, OR, UT, WA, WY,
Northern CA
NASA Educator Resource Center
Mail Stop 253-2
NASA Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000
Phone: (650) 604-3574
CT, DE, DC, ME, MD, MA, NH,
NJ, NY, PA, RI, VT
NASA Educator Resource Laboratory
Mail Code 130.3
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD 20771-0001
Phone: (301) 286-8570

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

97

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

CO, KS, NE, NM, ND, OK, SD, TX
Space Center Houston
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Johnson Space Center
1601 NASA Road One
Houston, TX 77058
Phone: (281) 244-2129

AL, AR, IA, LA, MO, TN
U.S. Space and Rocket Center
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
One Tranquility Base
Huntsville, AL 35807
Phone: (256) 544-5812

FL, GA, PR, VI
NASA Educator Resource Center
Mail Code ERC
NASA Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899
Phone: (321) 867-4090

MS
NASA Educator Resource Center
Building 1200
NASA Stennis Space Center
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529-6000
Phone: (228) 688-3220

VA and MD’s Eastern Shores
NASA Educator Resource Center
Visitor Center Building J-17
GSFC/Wallops Flight Facility
Wallops Island, VA 23337
Phone: (757) 824-2298

AZ and Southern CA
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Dryden Flight Research Center
45108 N. 3rd Street East
Lancaster, CA 93535
Phone: (661) 948-7347

KY, NC, SC, VA, WV
Virginia Air & Space Center
Educator Resource Center for
NASA Langley Research Center
600 Settlers Landing Road
Hampton, VA 23669-4033
Phone: (757) 727-0900 x 757

CA
NASA JPL Educator Resource Center
Village at Indian Hill
1460 East Holt Avenue, Suite 20
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pomona, CA 91767
Phone: (909) 397-4420

IL, IN, MI, MN, OH, WI
NASA Educator Resource Center
Mail Stop 8-1
NASA Glenn Research Center
21000 Brookpark Road
Cleveland, OH 44135
Phone: (216) 433-2017

98

Page 98

National Aeronautics
and Space Administration

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 99

Regional Educator Resource Centers offer
more educators access to NASA educational
materials. NASA has formed partnerships with
universities, museums, and other educational
institutions to serve as regional ERCs in many
states. A complete list of regional ERCs is available through CORE, or electronically via NASA
Spacelink at http://spacelink.nasa.gov/ercn/
NASA’s Education Home Page serves as a cybergateway to information regarding educational
programs and services offered by NASA for the
American education community. This high-level
directory of information provides specific details
and points of contact for all of NASA’s educational efforts, Field Center offices, and points of presence within each state. Visit this resource at the
following address: http://education.nasa.gov
NASA Spacelink is one of NASA’s electronic
resources specifically developed for the educational community. Spacelink serves as an electronic
library to NASA’s educational and scientific
resources, with hundreds of subject areas arranged
in a manner familiar to educators. Using Spacelink
Search, educators and students can easily find
information among NASA’s thousands of Internet
resources. Special events, missions, and intriguing
NASA Web sites are featured in Spacelink’s “Hot
Topics” and “Cool Picks” areas. Spacelink may be
accessed at: http://spacelink.nasa.gov

Check the Internet for program listings at:
http://www.nasa.gov/ntv
For more information on NTV, contact:
NASA TV
NASA Headquarters
Code P-2
Washington, DC 20546-0001
Phone: (202) 358-3572
NTV Weekday Programming Schedules
(Eastern Times)

Video File

NASA Gallery

Education File

12–1 p.m.
3–4 p.m.
6–7 p.m.
9–10 p.m.

1–2 p.m.
4–5 p.m.
7–8 p.m.
10–11 p.m.

2–3 p.m.
5–6 p.m.
8–9 p.m.
11–12 p.m.

12–1 a.m.

1–2 a.m.

2–3 a.m.

How to Access Information on NASA’s
Education Program, Materials, and Services EP2000-09-345-HQ
This brochure serves as a guide to accessing a
variety of NASA materials and services for educators. Copies are available through the ERC
network, or electronically via NASA Spacelink.

NASA Spacelink is the official home to electronic versions of NASA’s Educational Products.
A complete listing of NASA’s Educational
Products can be found at the following address:
http://spacelink.nasa.gov/products
NASA Television (NTV) features Space Station
and Shuttle mission coverage, live special events,
interactive educational live shows, electronic field
trips, aviation and space news, and historical
NASA footage. Programming has a 3-hour
block—Video (News) File, NASA Gallery, and
Education File—beginning at noon Eastern and
repeated five more times throughout the day. Live
feeds preempt regularly scheduled programming.

Space-Based Astronomy
Activity Guide for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

99

Page 101
8:54 AM
2/28/01
* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

Space-Based Astronomy
An Educator Guide with Activities
for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education

EDUCATOR REPLY CARD
To achieve America’s goals in Educational Excellence, it is NASA’s mission to
develop supplementary instructional materials and curricula in science, mathematics, and technology. NASA seeks to involve the educational community in
the development and improvement of these materials. Your evaluation and
suggestions are vital to continually improving NASA educational materials.
Please take a moment to respond to the statements and questions below.
You can submit your response through the Internet or by mail. Send your
reply to the following Internet address:

http://ehb2.gsfc.nasa.gov/edcats/educator_guide

Community College

Graduate

Community College

You will then be asked to enter your data at the appropriate prompt.
Otherwise, please return the reply card by mail. Thank you.

9-12
Undergraduate

9-12

Graduate

Professional Groups

Undergraduate

Parents

Other

5-8

5-8

1. With what grades did you use the educator guide?
Number of Teachers/Faculty:
K-4
College/University -

K-4

Number of Students:
College/University -

Administrators/Staff

Civic Groups

Number of Others:
General Public

❏ Strongly Disagree

❏ Strongly Disagree

2. What is your home 5- or 9-digit zip code? __ __ __ __ __ — __ __ __ __
3. This is a valuable educator guide?

❏ Strongly Agree ❏ Agree ❏ Neutral ❏ Disagree
4. I expect to apply what I learned in this educator guide.

❏ Strongly Agree ❏ Agree ❏ Neutral ❏ Disagree

Fold along line and tape closed.

educator guide?

❏ Good

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

❏ Poor

Standards Integration

❏ Very Poor

Science and Mathematics

Interdisciplinary Activity

Hands-On Activities

Demonstration

Critical Thinking Tasks

❏ Average

5. What kind of recommendation would you make to someone who asks about this

❏ Excellent

Other: Please specify:

Team Activities

Lecture

Integration Into Existing Curricula

Group Discussions

Demonstrate NASA Materials

Background Information

6. How did you use this educator guide?

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

Other: Please specify:

Workshop/Conference

Fellow Educator

Institution/School System

NASA Central Operation of Resources for Educators (CORE)

NASA Educator Resource Center

7. Where did you learn about this educator guide?

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

8. What features of this educator guide did you find particularly helpful?

9. How can we make this educator guide more effective for you?

10. Additional comments:

Today’s Date:

EG-2001-01-122-HQ

* Space Based Atronomy.b/w

2/28/01

8:54 AM

Page 102

Please Place
Stamp Here
Post Office
Will Not Deliver
Without Proper
Postage

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
EDUCATION DIVISION
MAIL CODE FE
WASHINGTON DC 20546–0001

!2054600012!
Fold along line and tape closed.

